Course content 
 Year 1 
 Personal Development and Professional Practice 1
  
  This is the first of four classes supporting development for professional practice. It includes placements in Early Years settings, primary schools and care homes. There's a key focus on developing the range of communication skills central to the work of speech and language therapists. 
 
 Phonetics: Theory
 
   In this class, you'll learn how voice and speech are produced, and the importance of this knowledge in speech and language therapy. The organisation of sounds in different groups of speakers will be discussed in depth, with a particular focus on the English language.
   
 
 Phonetics: Production & Transcription
  
  Small-group, practical classes provide you with in-depth training in the skill of accurately transcribing the speech sounds of typical and disordered speakers using the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA). 
 
 Linguistics 1: Pragmatics and Psycholinguistics
  
  Classes on pragmatics (use of language and communication in context) will cover theories, developmental norms and clinical application. Clear links will be made with the application of this knowledge in making decisions about how to assess and manage clients. In psycholinguistics classes, you’ll learn how communication can be broken down into various aspects of linguistic study, as a foundation to understanding communication development and disorders. 
 
 Introduction to Psychology
  
  This class introduces you to key findings, theories and debates in contemporary psychology, and encourages you to begin taking a critical approach to research findings and theory in the subject. 
  There are five key modules: 
   
   Learning Theory 
   Developmental Psychology 
   Personality 
   Cognitive Psychology 
   Sensation and Perception 
   
 
 Anatomy: Head, Neck and Nervous System
  
  In this lab-based class, you’ll learn about the structure and function of those parts of the head, neck and chest that are involved in the production of speech. You’ll study the functional anatomy of the central nervous system and its role in sensory perception and motor control. This forms the basis for later study of related disorders. 
 
 Physiology for Speech and Language Therapy
  
  This module will give you an understanding of the physiological structure of the human body, as a foundation to understanding the development and breakdown of typical behaviour and function.   
 
 Foundations for Inter-professional Practice
  
  You’ll take this class at Glasgow Caledonian University alongside students from a wide range of health and social care disciplines. 
  You’ll begin to develop an understanding of the importance of working inter-professionally in health and social care. There's a focus on developing the ability to reflect systematically to extend your professional development. 
     
 
 Year 2 
 Personal Development and Professional Practice 2
  
  This is the second of four classes supporting development for professional practice. It incorporates the second year practice placement. 
  You'll develop your clinical skills from a basic level to directed therapeutic involvement. This includes the further development of reflection, and a holistic approach to client management. There's also a focus on the selection, use, interpretation and application of clinical assessments. 
 
 Speech, Language and Communication Needs and Intervention 1 & 2 
  
  These classes consider impairments of speech, language, voice, fluency, cognition and autism as they present in children. 
  They cover assessment, as well as interventions designed to alleviate impairment, develop activity and adapt the communication environment to increase children’s participation in relevant contexts. 
  The social and legal context of Scottish schools and children’s services is also addressed. 
 
 Adult Aphasia, Dysarthria and Voice
  
  This class focuses on three groups of communication disorders as encountered within the adult population: 
   
   aphasia 
   dysarthria 
   voice 
   It familiarises you with the presenting features of the disorders, and equips you with the knowledge and skills to exercise your role in assessment, diagnosis and management of these conditions. 
 
 Neurology & Paediatrics
  
  This class builds on the foundations built during the first year in anatomy and physiology. There's a focus on a range of neurological and developmental disorders relevant to speech and language therapy practice, covering the origins, presenting features, assessment and interventions associated with each. 
     
 
 Audiology and ENT
  
  This class builds on the foundations built during the first year in anatomy and physiology. You’ll cover essential concepts for assessment and practice within audiology. There's a focus on a range of disorders of the ear, nose and throat relevant to speech and language therapy practice, covering the origins, presenting features, assessment and interventions associated with each. 
 
 Linguistics 2: Grammar, Semantics and Prosody
  
  Building on first year classes in linguistics and phonetics, you’ll develop your knowledge of linguistic analysis. There's a focus on grammar (structures), semantics (meanings), and prosody (rhythm, stress and intonation). Classes will cover theories, developmental norms and clinical application. You’ll be helped to make the links needed to apply this knowledge in making decisions about how to assess and manage clients. 
     
 
 Year 3 
 Personal Development and Professional Practice 3
  
  This is the third of four classes supporting development for professional practice. It incorporates the third year placement. 
  By the end of the class you should be demonstrating competence in placement skills, with emerging independence. There should be a developing critical appreciation of the evidence base guiding clinical practice. 
 
 Further Studies in Adult Communication Disorders
  
  This class builds on earlier study of adult communication disorders, by covering topics such as aphasia in more breadth and depth, and by extending the scope to disorders such as traumatic brain injury and the dementias. 
  An important focus is the broader cognitive changes commonly associated with communication disorders in adults. Also, in a progression from earlier study, this class includes study of laryngectomy (surgical removal of the voice-box) and intra-oral disorders. 
 
 Communication in Lifelong Conditions
  
  This class will build on your existing awareness, knowledge, understanding and skills, by covering childhood disorders that require specialist interventions: hearing impairment, cleft palate, physical disability and mental health conditions. You’ll also learn about the role of the speech and language therapist in working with adults with learning disabilities.   
 
 Linguistics 3: Sociolinguistics, Bilingualism and Speech Acoustics
  
  This class will build on lunguistic and phonetic knowledge gained in the first two years of the course. You'll learn about sociolinguistics, multilingualism and speech acoustics, and the relevance of these in speech and language therapy. You'll take part in lab based classes to gain practical experience of speech imaging and prosidic analysis. 
 
 Fluency, Voice and Counselling
  
  This class focuses on two client groups encountered within the adult population: those with voice disorders and fluency disorders. You’ll learn about the presenting features of the disorders, and you’ll develop the knowledge and skills to take your role in assessment, diagnosis and management of these conditions. You’ll also develop a critical understanding of the key components of selected approaches to counselling. 
 
 Introduction to Research Design and Analysis
  
  In this class, you'll join others within the faculty to be introduced to the main features of measurement, research design and statistical analysis. 
  The module will present concepts, issues and debates within research methods. It will cover inferential testing and statistics, as well as qualitative research methods. 
 
 Year 4 
 Personal Development and Professional Practice 4
 
   This is the last of four classes supporting development for professional practice. It incorporates the fourth and final placement, providing you with the opportunity to consolidate your skills and broaden your experience, whilst developing your independence. 
 
 Research Investigation
  
  You’ll formulate research questions in an area of individual interest, and design a small scale investigation. You’ll have individual supervision from a tutor to support you, as well as further classes about research methodology in speech and language therapy. 
 
 Advanced Study Option 1
  
  In this class, the focus is on critical evaluation of current research within key areas of speech and language therapy, implications for clinical practice and identification of future research needs. Specific areas of study vary, depending on student preference and staff availability. 
 
 Continuing Professional Development
  
  This module fosters development of key skills within the speech and language therapy workplace, such as decision-making and prioritisation, consultation and delegation, and inter-professional collaboration. 
  There's a focus on understanding and managing the challenges and expectations of working as a newly qualified speech and language therapist. 
 
 Advanced Study Option 2
  
  In this class, the focus is on critical evaluation of current research within key areas of speech and language therapy, implications for clinical practice and identification of future research needs. Specific areas of study vary, depending on student preference and staff availability. 
  
 