Course content 
 Year 1 
 Italian 
 Italian 1A 
  
  This intensive class, for those with SQA ‘Higher’ or equivalent, will enable you to develop the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A2 of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Italian 1B 
  
  Following on from Italian 1A, this intensive programme will broaden your knowledge of the Italian language, and enhance basic skills already acquired in reading, writing, listening and speaking. It'll also introduce you to new aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
  
 
 or﻿
 
 Introduction to Italian 1A 
  
  This intensive class, for beginners or false beginners, will enable you to develop the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A1 of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Introduction to Italian 1B 
  
  Following on from Introduction to Italian 1A, this accelerated and intensive programme will broaden your knowledge of the Italian language, and enhance basic skills already acquired in reading, writing, listening and speaking. It'll also introduce you to new aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
  
 Social policy 
 Social Policy & Society in Contemporary Scotland
  
  This class is designed to introduce you to some of the major issues confronting Scottish society and to provide an accessible introduction to some of the key concerns of Social Policy.   It will examine a range of issues, including questions of poverty and inequality, social divisions, health, housing, education, and criminal justice. 
 
 Private Issues & Public Problems
  
  This class examines the different ways in which ‘private issues’ become recognised as ‘public problems’.   Using a number of different case studies, such as domestic violence, homelessness or poverty, it will look at the different ways in which social problems have been identified and at the different standpoints from which they can be viewed. 
 
 Year 2 
 Italian 
 Italian 2A 
  
  This class will introduce you to more complex and formal areas of language, and enable you to develop further the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It will also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This course aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Italian 2B
  
  This class will introduce you to yet more complex and formal areas of language, and enable you to develop further the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This course aims to bring you up to level B1+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Modern Italy - State, Culture & Society
  
  This class provides a comprehensive overview of the major developments in Italian history, society and culture from the Unification to the present day. In Semester 1, you'll study 20th century Italian social, political and cultural history, while in Semester 2, you'll analyse a range of films and a literary text. This is an interdisciplinary class which can be taken by students with no knowledge of Italian. 
  
 Social policy 
 Scottish Social Policy since 1845
  
  This class explores some of the different ways in which social policy has evolved in Scotland in response to a variety of social problems since the introduction of the Scottish Poor Law Act in 1845. It covers all the main areas of social policy, including health, housing, education and poverty, and also explores the changing boundaries between individuals, families, communities, voluntary organisations, commercial welfare and state over the course of this period. 
 
 Key Concepts in Social Welfare
  
  This class explores some of the most important concepts in the academic study of Social Policy, including such concepts as equality, justice, need, happiness, poverty and wellbeing. It also examines a number of different ideological perspectives on these issues, such as liberalism, conservatism, socialism, social democracy, Marxism, feminism and the New Right. 
 
 The Making of Social Policy
  
  This class examines the ways in which social policies are ‘made’ at both a national and international level.   It examines the roles played by different actors, institutions and ideas.   It also looks at the ways in which evidence is used to inform policy-making, and at the ways in which we are all involved, as citizens, in the policy process.   These themes are explored with the aid of a series of case-studies, including health and education policies, and the development and implementation of equalities legislation. 
 
 Year 3 
 Italian 
 Italian Language 3A
  
  This class aims to build on the students’ knowledge and understanding of the Italian language and shifts the emphasis from the acquisition of linguistic knowledge to the production of a varied linguistic output both orally and in writing. In addition to classes in written and spoken Italian students also take a course in translation from Italian into English, which includes an introduction to translation theory and practice. 
 
 Italian Language 3B
  
  This class builds on the progress students have made in Italian 3A in spoken and written language. Students take a class in translation from English into Italian and engage in a large-scale group project, which encourages the development of a range of research and presentation skills. 
 
 Italian Stage & Screen
  
  The course explores the distinctive contribution made by Italian theatre and Italian cinema. Focusing on specific texts, such as Mascagni’s Cavalleria Rusticana, Luigi Pirandello’s Sei personaggi in cerca d’autore and Dario Fo’s Morte accidentale di un anarchico, and on films such as Germi’s Divorzio all'italiana and Moretti's Caro diario, students are encouraged to engage critically with the individual works studied in their exploration of the crucial contribution which Italy has made to the development of these two genres. 
  
 Social policy
 Compulsory classes: 
 Research Skills in Social Policy
  
  This class will help you to develop your knowledge and understanding of some of the key methods used by researchers in the field of social policy.   It will introduce you to a number of different qualitative and quantitative methods, and to some of the basic principles of research design.   It will provide an essential foundation for your final-year dissertation.﻿ 
 
 Scottish Social Welfare in a UK Context
  
  This class examines the ways in which recent political developments have placed questions of social policy at the heart of debates over the future of the United Kingdom.   To what extent do the different parts of the UK face different social problems?   To what extent do different parts of the UK possess a different approach to the resolution of these issues?   How has the governance of social policy in different parts of the UK been affected by its current constitutional arrangements? 
 
 Year abroad 
 Year abroad
  
  This is the year abroad, spent either studying in an Italian university or working as a language assistant or on a work placement. This year is compulsory to gain entry into Honours. 
 
 Year 4 
 Italian 
 Italian 4 Language A (Spoken Skills) 
  
  By this stage students can deal effectively and appropriately with a wide range of normal, everyday situations in Italian, and can function in a variety of contexts. In this class we focus on the development of specific communicative skills, in a formal register. This takes the form of an esposizione in which the student speaks on a prepared topic from a particular point of view, and bilateral interpreting, in which the student is asked to act as channel of information in two languages. 
 
 Italian 4 Language B (Writing Skills)
  
  This class builds on the experiences gained in Years 1-3, and further develops student skills in writing in formal Italian. The class involves the production of pieces of writing in Italian (summaries, reports), typically based on texts in English on Italian topics. 
 
 Italian 4 Language C (Translation)
  
  Taking forward the expertise in translation students have acquired in Years 2-3, the course further develops skills in working from English into Italian and from Italian into English. 
 
 Women, Celebrity Culture & Emancipation in Post-Unification Italy
  
  This course, situated within the socio-historical contexts of both the Risorgimento period and post-unification Italy until WW1, focuses on female performance and its consumption by both female and male spectators as mediated through women writers’ journals, letters, diary entries and realist fictional accounts (novels and short stories). It examines women writers’ relation to the European context and the recurring themes featuring in their popular domestic fiction which was in wide circulation, particularly during the 1880s. 
 
 Italian Resistance Culture
  
  The course is designed to provide students with a detailed knowledge of the Italian Resistance (1943-1945) and its impact on Italian culture, politics and society. It is an interdisciplinary course which requires students to show skills in history, as well as an understanding of literary and cinematic texts. Films/literary texts vary from year to year but typically include works from a wide variety of periods. 
 
 Visions of Italian Terrorism
  
  The course examines the way our understanding of Italian terrorism has been filtered through feature films, documentaries and television programmes. As with other final year studies classes this is an interdisciplinary class, which helps students to develop a wide range of research and analytical skills. 
  
 Social policy
 
 Compulsory classes:
  
 The Welfare State in Comparative Perspective
  
  This class examines the development of welfare states as a global phenomenon.   It asks what we mean by the concept of a ‘welfare state’ and looks at the ways in which welfare states have developed in different countries.   It also explores some of the major differences between different types of welfare state, using the concept of ‘welfare r&eacute;gimes’. 
 
 Dissertation
  
  Many students find that the dissertation is the most fulfilling part of their degree. It will provide you with the opportunity to undertake your own in-depth investigation into a topic of your choice, and to develop skills as an independent researcher. 
  
 