Course content 
 Year 1 
 Integrating Studies 1
 
   This class aims to develop a broad range of knowledge and skill concerned with studentship, professionalism and ICT and a technical working knowledge of product development resources, processes and procedures. 
 
 Introduction to Production Engineering and Management
 
   This class is a foundation class that aims to provide you with an overview of industry as well as management theory and practice, emphasising the key role of managers and engineers within organisations. It also aims to provide you with a general appreciation of the types of organisation and range of processes and materials employed in production. 
 
 Elective classes
  
  You can choose from: 
   
   How Things Work 
   Introduction to French 1A 
   Introduction to Italian 1A 
   Introduction to Spanish 1A 
   Introduction to Business Start-Up 
   The Universe & Everything 
   Introduction to French 1B 
   Introduction to Italian 1B 
   Introduction to Spanish1B 
   Entrepeneurship: Theory & Practice 
   
  
     
   
 
 Year 2 
 Design 2
 
   The aim of this class is to provide continuation of the first year classes, oncentrating on techniques appropriate to different phases of the design process including user centred research, conceptual, embodiment and detailed design. 
 
 Design and Manufacturing Management
 
   This class aims to provide you with an understanding of the key issues faced by design and project managers in the design and development of new products and services. The class also provides an understanding of the key issues faced by design and manufacturing managers and an awareness of the systematic approaches available for the design and layout of manufacturing systems. 
 
 Integrating Studies 2
 
   This class aims to develop the your ability to create appropriate functional prototypes for the purposes of mechanical design and visualisation. To engender an appreciation of different prototyping methods and their application areas. 
 
 Production Techniques 1
 
   This class aims to increase the depth of production technology knowledge gained in the first year Introduction to Production and Engineering Management class. It introduces you to primary processes for metal and polymer production, metal cutting theory, secondary manufacturing processes, engineering metrology, and the manufacture of electronic components and products. 
 
 Year 3 
 Integrating Studies 3
 
   This class aims to develop design and manufacturing project based skills relevant to each of the four undergraduate degree courses, and to provide practice in the application of engineering, manufacture and design principles. 
 
 Innovation Management
 
   This class aims to provide you with an understanding of the importance of innovation in today’s business environment. The class aims to also develop understanding and skills in the area of innovation management, including the management of intellectual property, financial decision making and commercialisation of ideas. 
 
 Product Development
 
   This methods based class aims to develop and enhance your knowledge of the issues, concepts, methodologies and methods involved in product design and development. 
 
 Production & Operations Management
  
  An appreciation of the hierarchical structure of operations planning activities and their complexity on the approaches and techniques currently available for the planning and control of manufacturing operations in typical different business situations. 
  The class also aims to provide advanced knowledge and competence in both design and management of different types of complex industrial operating system in the global market place; emphasis is on managing systems rather than management concepts of systems. 
  The final part of the class gives an understanding of the theory and principles of modelling of design and manufacturing processes. 
 
 Production Techniques 2
 
   This class aims to provide you with a knowledge and understanding of modern and non-traditional manufacturing techniques and with the ability to apply this knowledge to the design of tooling and the selection of the appropriate manufacturing techniques for creating components and products. It also aims to provide you with an understanding of the role of manufacturing processes in converting advanced materials into products, and the ability to carry out computer simulations of some of the primary processes. 
 
 Mechatronics Design and Applications
 
   This class aims to provide you with an understanding of the fundamental concepts and methods of mechatronic system design and applications including those in manufacturing industry. 
 
 Elective classes
  
  You can choose from: 
   
   Design Emotion and Experience 
   Design Interaction 
   Engineering Design 
   Product Development   
   Vertically Integrated Project    
   
 
 Year 4 
 Advanced Design Methods
 
   This class builds upon the knowledge of Design Methods acquired in DM306. It'll develop knowledge and understanding of the integration, development and application of design methods.   This is in the areas of design for manufacture and assembly, sustainability, cost and design for Xs at embodiement and detail design level. 
 
 Advanced Product Design and Manufacture
 
   This class aims to introduce design and manufacturing techniques and systems at an advanced level. It enables you to understand the application of advanced product design engineering and manufacturing techniques/systems in product development (in particular in mechatronic systems). This includes developing manufacturing plans for product realisation. It provides opportunities for you to develop technology focused products/systems within the class supervised environment as well as to generate plans for the manufacture of these products/systems for volume production. 
 
 Individual Project 1
 
   This class aims to consolidate and develop experience in undertaking a major individual project and develop a good appreciation of professional practice by utilising design, manufacturing and management knowledge acquired during the course and applying it to real life situations. 
 
 Industrial Group Project 1
 
   This class aims to integrate and apply design, manufacturing and management knowledge and skills, acquired in previous years of the course, to an industry based product development project and to develop team project skills. 
 
 Quality Management
 
   This class aims to equip you with a critical understanding of Quality Management and Control principles, concepts, tools and techniques. The class also aims to introduce you to statistically plan, design and execute industrial experiments for process understanding and improvement in both manufacturing and service environments. 
 
 Year 5 
 UG Individual Project 2
 
   This class aims to consolidate and develop experience in undertaking a major individual project and develop a good appreciation of professional practice by utilising design, manufacturing and management knowledge acquired during the course and applying it to real life situations. 
  
  You'll demonstrate knowledge of specific course related expertise. You're to further develop knowledge and validate solutions to a problem in a specialist area of choice in production engineering and management. 
 
 Industrial Group Project 2
 
   This class aims to integrate and apply design, manufacturing and management knowledge and skills, acquired in previous years of the course, to an industry based product development project and to develop team project skills. 
 
 Research Studies
 
   This class will develop research skills and acquire an in depth knowledge of a relevant research field. 
 
 Industrial Placement 4
  
  This class aims for you to gain experience at undertaking a project within industry and demonstrate an ability to relate theory to practice and vice versa. 
 
 Elective classes
  
  You can choose from: 
   
   Global Design 
   People, Organisation and Technology 
   Strategic technology Management  Product Modelling and Visualisation 
   Systems Integration 
   Supply Chain Operations 
   CAED Systems 
   Management of Total Quality and Continuous Improvement 
   Design Management   
   Information Management 
   Vertically Integrated Project 
   
  
 