Course content 
 Year 1
 Alongside this class, you'll also study two other classes from other departments in the Business School and two language classes of your choice. 
 Managing in a Global Context
  
  This class introduces you to the complexities of the international business environment by initially looking at the critical role of the manager and leadership in organisations today. The second half of the class gives an introductory set of lectures on the various complexities of the global business environment. 
 
 Year 2
 In addition to this class, you'll also study one class from your principal subject area and two language classes. 
 International Business Analysis
  
  This class furthers the foundation learning covered in the first year. It gives you a grounding in the historical context of international business, global institutions, theories underpinning international trade and investment, and the main decision criteria, considerations and options facing the firm or organization that is, or is wishing to, operate internationally. 
 
 Year 3
 You'll also study one class from your principal subject area and two language classes in addition to this class. 
 Managing Across Cultures & Frontiers
  
  This class builds on the theories and concepts introduced in Managing in a Global Context in year 1 and International Business Analysis in Year 2. It does so by focusing more on the complex cross-cultural and human resource issues associated with the implementation of international business practice and strategies. 
 
 Year 4 
 International Exchange
 
   You'll study business classes taught in your language of specialisation and language classes taught in your language of specialisation. You may also undertake a credit bearing work placement with permission from the University. 
  
 Year 5
 Expand AllCollapse All-->
 In addition to this class, you'll also study one class from your principal subject area and two language classes. You'll also undertake your dissertation this year which should have a strong international business context.
 Contemporary Issues & Trends in International Business
  
  This class aims to introduce you to a range of contemporary issues impacting on business organizations and managers operating in an international context. It encourages you to think critically about recent trends and issues and will provide you with a range of conceptual models and analytical tools appropriate to the changing landscape of international business.     
  
 