Course content 
 Year 1 - Core Engineering & Science Skills
 
 In first year you'll learn the essential skills and disciplines required to provide a strong foundation for future learning in electronic engineering, maths and computing science. You'll study subjects such as the principles of electronic circuits, software engineering, relevant mathematics and business skills. These skills will be reinforced by practical laboratory sessions which will help to develop your ability to translate concepts into reality.
  
 Compulsory classes 
 Engineering Industry & Profession 
  
  To provide an overview of industry and give you some understanding of the industry environment that you would enter as well as the types of roles you would/could undertake. To explain role and responsibility of the engineering profession and individual engineer. 
  The class is delivered to first-year undergraduate students in the specific context of electronic and electrical engineering together with relationship to mechanical engineering and computer systems. 
 
 Machines, Languages & Computation
 
   This class will help you achieve a broad knowledge of the essence of computation and computational systems, as embodied by the notions of computable functions, formal languages and recursion, logic and computability and abstract machines. 
 
 Programming Foundations
 
   This class will provide you with a solid foundation in the principles of computer programming. On completing this class you should have the necessary skills to be able to design, build and test a small system in a high-level language (Java in the current incarnation of the class). 
 
 Fundamentals of Computer Systems
  
  This class will further your knowledge of the design parameters of a typical computer system and the impact these have on the functionality, and implementation, of the hardware and software components. 
 
 Electronic & Electrical Principles 1 
 
   To provide you with a foundational understanding of the analysis and design of both analogue and digital electronic circuits. 
 
 Engineering Mathematics 1E
 
   To give a basic understanding of the concepts and applications of mathematical functions, differentiation, integration and complex numbers.   The class also provides an introductory experience of using mathematical tools to apply these concepts to practical engineering examples. 
 
 Engineering Mathematics 2E
 
   To give a basic understanding of the concepts and applications of calculus, geometry, vectors, matrices and numerical methods. 
 
 Year 2 - Core Engineering & Technology Skills
 
 In second year you'll build on the strong foundations of the first year and further broaden your knowledge through the introduction to a range of programming techniques and languages, and computer communications. More analysis of both hardware and software systems will be undertaken to enable you to see the bigger picture. Small scale projects will be introduced to allow you to hone the skills and techniques you have developed in the first two years of the course.
  
 Compulsory classes 
 Engineering Design & Manufacture 
 
   This class aims to introduce you to concepts and methodology required to undertake effective design and development of engineering systems. The product development process will be introduced and through practice, a working knowledge of appropriate engineering design processes, tools and techniques will be gained.
  
  An overview of manufacturing and the manufacturing industry will provide a general appreciation of the range of processes employed in manufacturing together with an understanding of how components can be manufactured economically and reliably. 
 
 Advanced Programming
  
  This class will further your skills in object-oriented programming, provide knowledge of key abstract data types along with their implementation and usage, and to provide experience in the development of larger scale software and an introduction to design. 
  Your main goal is to be able to develop larger programs with specialized data structures and utilizing APIs from a specification, and being able to ensure and show how the system they developed matches the specification. 
 
 Computer Systems & Architecture
 
   This class will allow you to develop a deeper understanding of typical computer architectures and their instruction sets and the complex tradeoffs between CPU clock speed, cache size, bus organisation, number of core processors, etc, that influence their design and have a fundamental impact on their performance. 
 
 Electronic & Electrical Principles 2 
 
   To introduce you to the analysis and design of analogue circuits and systems as used in electronics, energy & power systems, communications, control and analogue signal processing applications. 
 
 Digital Electronic Systems 
 
   To introduce you to the use of digital electronics and the rudiments of digital signal processing systems. 
 
 Engineering Mathematics 3E
  
  
   The aims of this class are:
   
   
   to develop the means of solving certain differential equations 
   to consider applications of Taylor and Maclaurin series 
   to generalise earlier ideas in calculus to deal with functions of several variables 
   to discuss in more detail matrices, determinants and functions of a complex variable 
   to introduce vector calculus and eigenvalues/eigenvectors 
   
  
 Elective classes
 A maximum of two classes are to be chosen. 
 Logic & Algorithms
 
   This class will equip you with the tools to model and measure computation. To build on the module Machines, Languages and Computation, and develop further understanding of the mathematical foundations of computation. To foster an analytical and empirical appreciation of the behaviour of algorithms and the use of abstract data types. 
 
 Physical Electronics 
 
   Following completion of this class you'll be able to demonstrate knowledge of following topics: 
  
   Basic Quantum Theory
   Early experiments – e/m, photo-electric effect 
   Structure of the atom
   Wave-particle duality
   Schrodinger equation and application in simple systems
   Basic Semiconductor Physics
   Crystal structure Electron mobility Band theory
   Doping of semiconductors
   Physics of p-n junctions
   Basic Device Physics
   Diode operation
   LED and laser diodes
   .
   
 
 Electromagnetism 
 
   You'll gain an understanding of the application of electromagnetic effects in practical devices and develop the mathematical skills necessary to analyse these effects in simple geometries. 
 
 Year 3 - Specialist Engineering Skills
 You'll study an approved curriculum at the overseas academic partner that's equivalent to what you would have studied if you had spent year 3 at Strathclyde. 
 Year 4 - Engineering for Your Professional Future
 
 In Year 4 you undertake an individual research project, which will help you gain valuable technical and project management skills, along with a selection of advanced technical modules of your choice.
  
 Compulsory class 
 Individual Project
 
   You undertake an individual research project.   This will help you gain valuable technical and project management skills. 
  
 Elective classes
 At least four classes to be chosen. 
 Software Architecture & Design
  
  This class aims to: 
   
   enable you to understand the challenges of advanced software design and the issues associated with large-scale software architectures, frameworks, patterns and components 
   develop your understanding of the tools and techniques that may be used for the automatic analysis and evaluation of software 
   
 
 Theory of Computation
 
   Building on the previous material in software development, you'll extend and formalise your abilities in the area of computational complexity. 
 
 Communications Networks 
 
   To provide an understanding of the principles and key transport technologies which underpin high-speed heterogeneous broadband communications networks and architectures while giving an insight to the technical and strategic challenges associated with the provision of a Quality of Service (QoS)-based integrated future-network platform. 
 
 Digital Signal Processing Principles 
 
   Develop necessary tools that will allow you to design, analyse and simulate (Matlab/Simulink) DSP systems by introducing core mathematical concepts, algorithms and fundamental properties of discrete signal and systems with applications 
 
 Embedded Systems
 
   This class allows you to undertake the design and development process for embedded (dedicated) computer systems in relation to the environment in which they operate and to know how to integrate embedded hardware, software, and operating systems to meet the functional requirements of embedded applications. 
 
 Digital Forensics
 
   This class allows you to understand issues associated with the nature of cybercrime, digital evidence, detection methods and proof, in a variety of digital forensic contexts, including computers, networks and portable digital devices. 
 
 Information Transmission & Security 
 
   Impart an understanding of the principles by which information can transmitted with varying levels of security and the techniques by which communication systems can be analysed and designed. 
 
 Control Principles 
  
  
   This class aims:
   
   
   to introduce you to the basic concepts, mathematical tools and design methods of classical control theory 
   to enable you to use analysis and design tools used in control engineering and appreciate the industrial applications of control systems 
   to enable you to analyse and design closed loop control system specifically using industrial three-term (PID) controllers 
   to introduce you to advanced control methods and to provide a basic understanding of a time-domain approach to control analysis and design of industrial processes 
   to appreciate the application of control theory in industrial applications 
   
 
 Photonic Systems 
 
   The primary aim of this class is to enable you to develop a basic conceptual understanding and working knowledge of fibre optic communications systems and their component parts addressing basic principles, engineering, design and performance limits. All of the fundamental principles of light, optics and photonic components necessary to achieve this are dealt with, giving a broad appreciation of photonics in general. 
 
 Analogue Systems 
 
   This class will provide you with an appreciation and understanding of analogue electronic circuit design, relating to high frequency amplifiers and low noise design of electronic systems. 
 
 Year 5 - Engineering for Your Professional Future
 
 In year 5 you'll have the opportunity to develop your team-working skills through a multidisciplinary group project. 
 In addition to the project, you'll select from a range of advanced computing and electronic application areas.
  
 Compulsory class 
 CES group project
  
  This project will have a strong industrial influence and provide you with the opportunity to utilise both your hardware and software skills by developing a fully functioning system, which you're required to demonstrate at an internal business tradeshow/exhibition at the end of the year. 
  
 Elective classes
 At least four classes are to be chosen. 
 Computer Security 
  
  This class aims to develop an in-depth understanding of the nature of security in the contexts of computers, information and networks. 
 
 Designing Usable Systems 
  
  To develop research level understanding of the design of interfaces for newly emerging technologies and computing domains such as ubiquitous and mobile computing, universal access and collaborative displays. 
 
 Distributed Information Systems 
  
  This class will help you to gain an extended understanding of the deep technical issues underlying information systems in the particular context of distributing content over the world-wide web. 
 
 Advanced Topics in Software Engineering 
  
  The class will introduce you to a selection of recent advances in software engineering, along with some of the challenges and outstanding problems. 
  The detailed aims of the class are: 
   
   To make you aware of key aspects of current software engineering research 
   To familiarise you with the state-of-the-art in terms of what problems can be solved and what are the current exciting challenges 
   To develop the necessary skills to allow you to contribute to the software engineering research community 
   To equip you with the skills and background to appreciate the contributions to software engineering research across the full range of material presented at the key international conferences in the field 
   
 
 Mobile & Wireless Networks 
 
   Impart an understanding of how mobile networks work, the requirements and constraints which they contend with, and the operation of common wireless networks, including GSM, UMTS and Wi-Fi. 
 
 Image & Video Processing 
  
  
   To provide an introduction to the techniques relevant to digital images and video.
   
  
   This includes techniques both to process images and video and also to efficiently compress and communicate them.
   
  
   The class will give you a comprehensive understanding of various image and video processing and coding standards. You'll also study some key applications of these standards.
   
 
 Mobile Software and Applications 
  
  The aim of this class is to develop an understanding of the underpinning theories, paradigms, algorithms and architectures for building software applications to function in mobile computing environments. 
 
 Advanced Digital Signal Processing 
 
   Develop the necessary skills that will allow you to analyse, design, implement and simulate advanced DSP techniques and algorithms for a variety of communications and general engineering problems. 
 
 Advanced Microcontroller Applications 
 
   Provide advanced competence in the use of industry standard microcontrollers programmed in low and high level languages in real time applications. 
 
 Control Techniques 
  
  This class aims: 
   
   to introduce you to the concepts and tools of modelling, simulation for control of dynamical systems 
   to introduce you to the concepts of computer control engineering and enable you to learn the skills required to understand and analyse digital control systems for real time engineering applications 
   to enable you to appreciate the design of estimation and its use in control design 
   to introduce you to the methods of system parameter identification and its application in control engineering 
   to present you with the concepts of fault monitoring, detection, isolation in dynamical systems 
   to introduce you to the monitoring and evaluation of closed-loop system performance 
   to appreciate the industrial applications of control engineering methods 
   
 
 DSP & FPGA-Based Embedded System Design 
 
   Design and implementation of real time embedded systems through familiarisation with Digital Signal Processors (DSPs) and FPGAs via lectures, up-to-date technical discussions and hardware programming. This class provides hands-on experience in translating Digital Signal Processing concepts into real-time embedded systems applications. 
  
 