Course content 
 The MPharm degree is an integrated, full-time five-year undergraduate programme. 
 Normally suitably qualified students will be admitted directly into year 2. Entry into year 1 of the programme is available but is not the standard route. 
 Year 2 
 Normal Function of the Gastrointestinal Tract 
 
   This class looks at the normal function of the gastrointestinal tract. It also introduces the pharmacist’s role in the management of minor ailments related to this system. This is the first MPharm class and it'll provide an introduction to all topics and areas of study that you’ll build upon throughout the programme. 
 
 Normal Function of the Cardiovascular & Respiratory Systems
 
   You'll learn about the normal function of both respiratory and cardiovascular systems and the pharmacist’s role in the management of minor ailments related to these systems. It'll build on knowledge introduced in Normal Function of the Gastrointestinal Tract and introduce principles related to distribution around the body. 
 
 Normal Function of the Nervous & Endocrine Systems 
 
   This class looks at the normal function of both nervous and endocrine systems and the pharmacist’s role in the management of minor ailments related to these systems. It builds on material introduced in the Normal Function of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Normal Function of the Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems where the principles of autonomic control (eg smooth muscle, cardiac) were covered. 
 
 Normal Function of the Hepatic & Renal Systems 
 
   Following the drug absorption and distribution processes described in other classes, content here will focus on the hepatic and renal systems and their role in drug metabolism and excretion, which will then be further expanded across all Year 3 classes. The importance of knowledge renal and hepatic function on the sale of OTC medicines and the legal and professional role of the pharmacist in this area will be explored. 
 
 Being a Pharmacist 1 
 
   This class complements elements of your other classes classes by using a series of laboratories, simulations and experiential learning to allow you to show and do what you've learned. It'll also cover the behaviours and attitudes expected of a pharmacist as a healthcare professional, including continuing personal and professional development across all Year 3 classes. The importance of knowledge of renal and hepatic function on the sale of OTC medicines and the legal and professional role of the pharmacist in this area will be explored. 
 
 Year 3 
 Management of Infection & Infectious Diseases
 
   In this class, you'll learn about the scientific and clinical principles of identification and management of infection and infectious diseases. When you complete the class, you'll have a sound understanding of the immune system and its response to infection, causes of infection and infectious diseases (bacterial, fungal and viral), and how to treat infection and infectious diseases. You'll appreciate the problems encountered when administering anti-infective agents and understand how anti-microbial agents are developed, manufactured and used. 
 
 Management of Gastrointestinal & Endocrine Conditions
 
   You'll learn the pathophysiology and treatment of diseases of the gastrointestinal tract and endocrine system. This will cover the pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, formulation and pharmacokinetics of drugs used to treat these conditions. It will build on concepts introduced in Management of Infection and Infectious Diseases related to the methods used to prevent, diagnose, monitor, manage and provide pharmaceutical care to patients with these disease states. 
 
 Management of Cardiovascular Conditions
 
   You'll learn the pathophysiology and treatment of diseases of the cardiovascular system. This will build on concepts in pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, formulation and pharmacokinetics of drugs introduced in Management of Infection and Infectious Diseases and Management of GI and Endocrine conditions. It'll also build on the methods used to prevent, diagnose, monitor, manage and provide pharmaceutical care to patients. 
 
 Management of Respiratory & Inflammatory Conditions
 
   You'll learn the pathophysiology and treatment of diseases of the respiratory system and inflammatory conditions. This will build on concepts in pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, formulation and pharmacokinetics of drugs introduced in Management of Infection and Infectious Diseases, Management of GI and Endocrine conditions and Management of Cardiovascular conditions. It'll also build on the methods used to prevent, diagnose, monitor, manage and provide pharmaceutical care to patients. 
 
 Being a pharmacist 2
 
   This class complements elements of your other classes this year using a series of laboratories, simulations and experiential learning to allow you to show and do what you've learned. It'll also cover the behaviours and attitudes expected of a pharmacist as a healthcare professional, including continuing personal and professional development. 
 
 Year 4 
 Management of Malignancy & Inflammatory Conditions
  
  You'll learn the pathophysiology that leads to malignancy and develop further the understanding and management of inflammatory diseases of the joints, skin and GI tract, complimenting and building on the Year 3 classes. 
  This class covers the pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, formulation and pharmacokinetics of drugs used to treat these conditions and introduce the methods used to diagnose, monitor and manage patients with these disease states. You'll gain knowledge in developing a pharmaceutical care plan for effective management of patients with these diseases, based on legislation and national guidelines. 
  Additionally, you'll understand the professional role of a pharmacist in managing patients with malignancy and inflammatory conditions and how this links with the Chronic Medication Service. 
 
 Management of Central Nervous System Conditions
  
  Having being introduced to the function of the Central Nervous System (CNS) and Peripheral Nervous System (PNS) under Normal Function of the Nervous and Endocrine Systems in Year 2 and how this integrates with the normal physiological function of the rest of the body, you'll learn about the pathophysiological conditions associated with the CNS. This'll build on Year 3 & 4 classes where aspects of normal CNS & PNS function including pain, nausea and vomiting contribute to disease symptoms and management. 
  Using exemplars from medicines used to treat these conditions, you'll learn about the quality control and quality assurance methods used to ensure that medicines are safe, effective and of good quality. You'll gain knowledge in developing a pharmaceutical care plan for effective disease management based on legislation and national guidelines in addition to understanding the professional role of a pharmacist in managing patients with CNS conditions and how this links with the Chronic Medication Service.   
 
 Management of Patients with Co-morbidities
 
   This class will build on the knowledge that you've gained in previous classes on the management of patients with single system diseases. You'll learn about the additional challenges of managing patients with diseases of more than one system, the long term effects of chronic disease and other clinical or demographic characteristics that influence which drugs can be used, how they are formulated and how they are administered while applying the principles of patient management from the classes in years 2, 3 and 4. 
 
 Being a Pharmacist 3
  
  Laboratory and workshop sessions include using your knowledge of physiology, pharmacology, microbiology, medicinal chemistry, formulation, quality control of the medicines and community, hospital and primacy care pharmacy to the management of patients. 
  You'll demonstrate ‘show how’ and ‘does’ skills and expertise in the professional aspects of pharmacy. The examples will be primarily referenced to malignancy and inflammatory disease; management of CNS conditions; and management of co-morbidities but will also relate to knowledge from classes in year 2 and 3 of the MPharm. Laboratory and workshop sessions will equip you with expertise in application of your knowledge to the delivery of pharmaceutical care to patients with these diseases. Timely formative feedback, to allow you to gauge your own personal development, will be provided by use of moderated group discussions using scenarios captured from experiential learning to generate discussion and allow you and your classmates to consolidate learning. 
 
 Year 5 
 Evidence Based Medicine
  
  This class builds on the principles of clinical pharmacology, pharmaceutics, medicinal chemistry and professional practice that were introduced in years 2, 3 and 4. If a split pre-registration year is introduced it'll also build on the period of learning in practice that could come between years 4 and 5 of the MPharm. 
  It focuses on how new drugs are identified, formulated, tested and monitored during the development process and how evidence is generated and used to inform clinical practice through both the development of guidelines and in the management of patients where guidelines are not applicable.   
 
 Being a Pharmacist 4
  
 
 Research Project
  
  You're allocated an individual project aim (based, as far as possible, on your preference) which may be part of a common theme with of up to five other supervised students. 
  Project topics are associated with the research interests of the School of Pharmacy relating to our theme of 'new medicines; better medicines; better use of medicines'. 
  Projects can be either laboratory based or non-laboratory based as appropriate to the project. 
  
 