Course content 
 The Management Development Programme (MDP) is a core element of the undergraduate degree programme in the Strathclyde Business School. 
 The programme runs for the first three years of the BA degree. The entire class is driven by real business problems and the approach to learning is active problem-based, with students working in project teams. 
 The class aims to encourage integration of the knowledge and experience gained in Principal Subjects. Each year of the MDP focuses on different aspects of business and the content of MDP is constantly evolving and being updated and enhanced. 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Business Analysis 
 Foundations of Business Analysis & Technology 
  
  Business Analysis & Technology is the study of how analytical thinking, scientific method and tools can be used to help decision making. This class aims to introduce a variety of analytical methods that form the basis of analysing any business problem as well as provide students with an overview of technological change and how it affects all aspects of an organisation. 
  The aims of this class are: 
   
   To raise awareness of the real world problems encountered by industry that can be solved through Management Science methodology 
   To develop an understanding of the tools and techniques used by business analysts 
   To provide students with an awareness of why and where organisations use technology 
   To highlight the integrative role of technology within organisations 
   To demonstrate the dynamic nature of technology 
   
  
 Economics 
 Introduction to Economics
  
  The purpose of this class is to provide you with a balanced introduction to economics which will be at once self-contained and lay the foundation for further study in economics and more generally. The work of the class will be based on a programme of systematic directed reading, supplemented by tutorials, using group projects and in-class short answer tests as cumulative assessment. 
 
 Year 2 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
  
 Business Analysis 
 Semester 1
 Analysing & Improving Operations 
  
  This class is one of the two undergraduate Business Analysis & Technology classes before the Honours year that apply various approaches to Operations Management problems. Following on from the fundamentals in the first year class, this class introduces you to the subject of Operations Management in detail and provides opportunity for you to apply some of the basic decision analysis techniques in this context.﻿ 
  
 Semester 2
 Managing Business Processes & Information Systems 
  
  This class forms a bridge between the first year class and more advanced classes in Enterprise Resource Planning, Business Process Outsourcing, the role of ICT in business environment, etc. 
  The class will seek to combine conceptual and technical skills, and it will provide the basis for a series of classes in third and Honours years, especially in areas of Business Process Integration with ERP, organisational innovation and E-commerce. 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 2
  
  This is the core microeconomics class in second year. It aims to develop your understanding of: the concepts of consumer choice; the motives of the firm and profit maximisation; the market and its role in achieving equilibrium prices and quantities; and the implications of market power. It will introduce you to mathematical techniques commonplace in economics, giving you the ability to apply these in a wider economic context. 
     
 
 Macroeconomics 2
 
   The class builds upon the macroeconomic foundations established in the first year Economics class and both extends and deepens analysis. In particular this class will develop your ability to use key macroeconomic models and will also provide an introduction to the analysis of economic data. 
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Business Analysis 
 Semester 1
 Understanding & Optimising Business Systems 
  
  The first part of the course will introduce and build experience in two problem structuring methods, SODA and Soft Systems Methodology. The second part will establish an overall understanding of how supply chains work as well as appropriate modelling approaches to address various operational challenges. The third part of the course will introduce basic mathematical optimisation modelling and present how it can be used to tackle problems in different business systems, including applications in supply chains. 
  The fourth and final part of the course will introduce the students to the ideas of Multi-criteria Decision Analysis to make students aware of the importance of carefully defining objectives when intervening in business systems. Overall, the course will equip students with the qualitative and quantitative analytic skills and techniques in order to make action recommendations for performance improvements in complex business systems. 
  
 Semester 2
 Knowledge & Innovation Management
  
  In this class, students will develop a comprehensive picture about knowledge and innovation. It goes to the very basis of what constitutes knowledge and knowledge work, and, based on this, develops the notion of creativity, as creation of new knowledge, and subsequently conceptualises innovation as new value created from the new knowledge. 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 3
  
  Adam Smith's hidden hand - markets result in efficient outcomes - doesn't always work. We seek to understand why through the study of market power, externalities and public goods, and then go on to apply these ideas to issues of education, healthcare provision and crime and punishment. 
 
 Macroeconomics 3
 
   This class builds on the Macroeconomics you studied in second year by covering four topics in detail: (i) models of economic growth; (ii) the effects of macroeconomic policy in an open economy; (iii) the interrelationships between money growth, output, unemployment and inflation; and (iv) the implications of high government debt. 
 
 Year 4 
 Business Analysis 
 Business Analytics Using Data Mining
  
  This class builds upon students understanding of information systems. It'll provide you with the opportunity to develop analytical approaches for mining data using commercial software that'll be intellectually challenging and useful. 
  This class focuses on the methods used for mining data, complementing the other Honours classes that provide business context and processes. 
 
 Business Process Integration with Enterprise Resource Planning
  
  This class investigates the application of sophisticated business technology systems to the management and, more particularly, integration of business processes. 
  In doing so, it builds directly on the knowledge and skills acquired as part of Management of Business Processes and, in a more indirect manner, on classes like Technological and Organisational Innovation, Information Systems in the Knowledge Economy, and Information Systems Support for Managers. 
 
 Risk Analysis & Management
  
  Identifying and managing risk is a fundamental skill required by managers. Many models exist for supporting risk assessment and this is a major area of interest within the Management Science department. 
  This class will introduce you to the general concepts of risk and common measures used as well as considering ways of modelling and interpreting technical risk within the context of managing complex systems in areas such as transportation, aerospace, health. 
  It'll develop knowledge and skills introduced in years 1-3 in operations, statistics and modelling classes by integrating and extending them within the context of risk assessment. 
 
 Management Science 4
  
  An important aspect of this class is the experiential learning element, where you'll work in teams on management science projects, directly for external clients. 
  The clients will introduce their problems, provide information during the project, and listen to your recommended solutions. These client projects will be chosen to highlight the differing nature of individual practice, allowing comparisons between qualitative and quantitative projects to be explored. 
  Alongside the experiential learning will be a reflective element, which will focus on issues relating to client, consultant relations and implementation of management science, as well as addressing more conceptual issues relating to problem structuring, modelling, data collection, and choosing and mixing methods in the light of your growing experience. 
  Professional and ethical considerations will be highlighted, introducing you to the areas of agreement and debate within the profession. This class will also include an individual or small group project, where you'll select a technique or method they haven’t previously studied to research in more depth, mirroring professional development that they will undertake in practice. This component of the class will be managed through learning contracts. 
  
 Economics 
 Compulsory classes
 Dissertation 
 
   The dissertation is an important part of the fourth year programme. Single Honours Economics BA students are required to submit a dissertation in Economics while Joint Honours BA students may submit a dissertation in Economics or in their other Honours subject. 
  
 Elective classes﻿
 Choose from this list
 Microeconomics 4
  
  Game Theory and  Information Economics, the topics of this class, consider market failure  resulting from two different sources: individuals pursuing their own  self-interest at the  expense of others; and information asymmetry which alters  the way agents behave.  Methods to alleviate these market failures will also be  considered. 
 
 Macroeconomics 4
  
  This class aims to provide you with the required tools to understand current macroeconomic issues, such as the interactions between the banking sector and monetary policy or the policy responses to the global financial crisis.    Throughout the class, the analytical usefulness of the theoretical models taught is illustrated with real-world examples. 
 
 Introduction to Econometrics
  
  This class builds upon the empirical content of Macroeconomics 2 and further develops your ability to analyse economic data. In addition, this class lays the foundations for further study of econometrics at Honours level. 
 
 Economics of Firms & Industries 
  
  This class introduces you to different industry structures and studies the behaviour of firms within those structures.   The material builds on the study of the theory of the firm presented in Microeconomics 2 and provides a foundation for the study of industrial organisation at Honours level. 
 
 Industrial Economics
 
   This course investigates the actions that firms in an industry might take to preserve their profit in that industry, and the implications that this has for competition policy and regulation. We take an analytical approach to the issues which will be supported by examining case studies and current events. 
 
 Applied Econometrics
  
  In the third year econometrics class you’ll have learned about regression in both a cross-sectional data and time series data context. This class extends that knowledge in three ways. 
  First, for cross-sectional data, the class deals with regression techniques where the dependent variable may be restricted or limited in some way. In such cases, the regression model as taught in the third year class is not appropriate; this class develops models which are similar in spirit to the standard regression model, but can handle all of these cases. 
  A second purpose of Applied Econometrics is to develop regression methods which can be used when you have panel data - consisting of both cross-sectional and time-series dimensions. 
  Third, the class will build on the introduction to the econometrics of time series data developed in this class by developing two classes of models. 
 
 Financial Development & Economic Growth
  
  This class gives a balanced view of the role of finance in promoting long-run economic growth, but also booms and busts. The nature and role of financial intermediaries will be introduced, and, afterwards, formally addressed in a simple aggregate growth model. Empirical evidence will be examined, before turning to the specificities of micro-finance. The importance of financial globalisation will also be investigated. Finally, the rest of the class will be devoted to deciphering the causes and consequences of the current financial crisis. 
 
 Behavioural Economics
  
  Behavioural Economics offers alternative theories that merge psychological insights with economic theory and are based on experimental and other evidence, that attempt to provide a better explanation of real-world behaviour. 
  This class is concerned with exploring these new behavioural theories with the aim of providing you with an expanded toolkit with which to approach ‘real-world Economics’ that is based on the burgeoning Behavioural Economics literature that has emerged over the past two or three decades. 
  After studying this, you should be able to extend much of your previously-learned knowledge in Microeconomics in various directions that take into account more realistic ways of modelling how individuals behave. 
 
 Natural Resource, Environmental & Energy Economics
  
  The module provides you with an introduction to natural resource, environmental and energy economics and policy. It focuses on the contributions of economics to understanding environmental, energy and resource problems, their causes, and the design of effective public policies to counteract them. 
  
 