Course content 
 Year 1 
 Social Policy 
 Social Policy & Society in Contemporary Scotland
  
  This class is designed to introduce you to some of the major issues confronting Scottish society and to provide an accessible introduction to some of the key concerns of Social Policy.   It will examine a range of issues, including questions of poverty and inequality, social divisions, health, housing, education, and criminal justice. 
 
 Private Issues & Public Problems
  
  This class examines the different ways in which ‘private issues’ become recognised as ‘public problems’.   Using a number of different case studies, such as domestic violence, homelessness or poverty, it will look at the different ways in which social problems have been identified and at the different standpoints from which they can be viewed. 
  
 Spanish 
 Spanish 1A 
  
  This course will further your knowledge of the Spanish language and develop the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in the Spanish language through intensive practical and communicative language work. This course aims to bring you up to level A2 of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. You'll extend your knowledge of the cultures of the Spanish-speaking world and focus on the development of contemporary Latin America and on how issues relating to it are reflected in its cultural production (for example, films, journalism, songs). 
 
 Spanish 1B 
  
  Following on from Spanish 1A, this course will broaden your knowledge of the Spanish language, and enhance basic skills already acquired in reading, writing, listening and speaking. This course aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. It'll also introduce you to new aspects of the culture of Spain through the materials used. Practical language activities, such as pair and small group work and intensive exposure to Spanish through audio, video and written texts, will enable you to progress from the levels achieved in Spanish 1A. Successful completion of this class will enable students to take Spanish 2A in semester 1 of second year. 
  
 
 or﻿
 
 Introduction to Spanish 1A
  
  This course aims to give an introduction to the Spanish language, assuming limited or no previous knowledge of Spanish. It introduces everyday Spanish language, as well as certain aspects of the cultures of the Spanish-speaking world. The class is intended to help students to develop the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in basic Spanish. 
 
 Introduction to Spanish 1B 
  
  This course builds on and develops the knowledge acquired in Introduction to Spanish 1A. The class will broaden your knowledge of Spanish language and enhance skills already acquired of reading, writing, listening and speaking in basic Spanish. This class also introduces students to new aspects of the culture of the Spanish-speaking world. 
 
 Year 2 
 Social Policy 
 Scottish Social Policy since 1845
  
  This class explores some of the different ways in which social policy has evolved in Scotland in response to a variety of social problems since the introduction of the Scottish Poor Law Act in 1845. It covers all the main areas of social policy, including health, housing, education and poverty, and also explores the changing boundaries between individuals, families, communities, voluntary organisations, commercial welfare and state over the course of this period. 
 
 Key Concepts in Social Welfare
  
  This class explores some of the most important concepts in the academic study of Social Policy, including such concepts as equality, justice, need, happiness, poverty and wellbeing. It also examines a number of different ideological perspectives on these issues, such as liberalism, conservatism, socialism, social democracy, Marxism, feminism and the New Right. 
 
 The Making of Social Policy
  
  This class examines the ways in which social policies are ‘made’ at both a national and international level.   It examines the roles played by different actors, institutions and ideas.   It also looks at the ways in which evidence is used to inform policy-making, and at the ways in which we are all involved, as citizens, in the policy process.   These themes are explored with the aid of a series of case-studies, including health and education policies, and the development and implementation of equalities legislation. 
  
 Spanish 
 Spanish 2A
  
  This course will introduce you to more complex and formal areas of language, and enable you to develop further the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in the Spanish language. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the different cultures of Spain and Latin America through the materials used. Practical language activities such as pair and small group work and intensive exposure to the Spanish language through audio, video and written texts will build on what you already know, and give you a feel for the Spanish language as it is used in professional contexts. This course aims to bring you up to level A2+/B1 of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. 
 
 Spanish 2B 
  
  This course builds on and develops the knowledge acquired in Spanish 2A and will introduce you to yet more complex and formal areas of language, improving and developing further the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in the Spanish language. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Spain and Latin America through the materials used. Practical language activities such as pair and small group work and intensive exposure to the Spanish language through audio, video and written texts will build on what you already know, and give you a feel for the Spanish language as it is used in professional contexts. Successful completion of this class will enable students to take Spanish at third-year level. This course aims to bring you up to level B1+ of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. 
 
 Spanish & Latin American Studies II
  
  This course will explore the interlinked themes of independence and isolation in Spain and Latin America. The class is intended to give students a broad overview of Spanish and Latin American social, political and cultural history through the examination of specific texts and films, as well as to develop their critical and research skills. 
 
 Year 3 
 Social Policy 
 Research Skills in Social Policy
  
  This class will help you to develop your knowledge and understanding of some of the key methods used by researchers in the field of social policy.   It will introduce you to a number of different qualitative and quantitative methods, and to some of the basic principles of research design.   It will provide an essential foundation for your final-year dissertation.﻿ 
 
 Scottish Social Welfare in a UK Context
  
  This class examines the ways in which recent political developments have placed questions of social policy at the heart of debates over the future of the United Kingdom.   To what extent do the different parts of the UK face different social problems?   To what extent do different parts of the UK possess a different approach to the resolution of these issues?   How has the governance of social policy in different parts of the UK been affected by its current constitutional arrangements? 
  
 Spanish 
 Spanish 3A 
  
  This course builds on and develops the knowledge acquired in Spanish 2B and will consolidate the students’ knowledge and use of the Spanish language within an appropriate cultural context in order to enable the student to live, study and work in a Spanish-speaking country. This course aims to bring you up to level B2 of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. 
 
 Spanish 3B
 
   This course aims to build on and develop the knowledge acquired in Spanish 3A and will focus on two relevant topics which includes the preparation for the year abroad. This course aims to bring you up to level B2+ of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. In addition to the final exam, a comprehensive project will comprise the other 50% of your final mark for this course. This project will enable you to put into practice and further develop the linguistic skills and cultural knowledge you have developed since you started studying Spanish at Strathclyde. 
 
 Spanish & Latin American Studies III
  
  This course builds on and develops the knowledge acquired in Independence and isolation in Spain and Latin America - Hispanic Studies 2 (R4200), and adds a dimension of critical and theoretical awareness, as well as developing critical skills through a study of individual texts and films from Spain and different countries of Latin America, to build an understanding of the history and cultures in which they were produced. 
 
 Year abroad 
 Year abroad
  
  This is the year abroad, spent either studying in a foreign university or working as a language assistant or on a work placement. This year is compulsory to gain entry into Honours. 
 
 Year 4 
 Social Policy 
 The Welfare State in Comparative Perspective
  
  This class examines the development of welfare states as a global phenomenon.   It asks what we mean by the concept of a ‘welfare state’ and looks at the ways in which welfare states have developed in different countries.   It also explores some of the major differences between different types of welfare state, using the concept of ‘welfare r&eacute;gimes’. 
 
 Dissertation
  
  Many students find that the dissertation is the most fulfilling part of their degree. It will provide you with the opportunity to undertake your own in-depth investigation into a topic of your choice, and to develop skills as an independent researcher. 
  
 Spanish 
 Compulsory classes
 Spanish Honours Language 4
  
  There are three strands in the Spanish 4 Language programme, which are closely integrated with each other: Language A (writing in Spanish), Language B (analysis and translation into English of Spanish texts), and Language C (oral presentation and interpreting). The programme will enable students to function in the target language at a sufficiently high level of ability, both spoken and written, to be accepted as a fully competent member of the target language community, and effectively to discharge a professional role within and/or in relation to that community. 
 
 Hispanic Studies 4
  
  This is a level four Honours class designed to build on the knowledge of Hispanic cultural studies acquired in Spanish and Latin American Studies 1A, II and III. The purpose of this class is to explore contemporary issues in Hispanic cultures. Class content will reflect the research specialisms of staff in Spanish and the actual texts and films studies may vary from year to year to reflect student demand and staff availability, as determined by the research focus of the subject. Each year, the class will focus on specific aspects of Hispanic history, politics, society and/or cultures. For example, possible class titles are: Gender and Sexuality in the Hispanic world; The Politics of the Fantastic in Hispanic Fiction and Film; Dictatorship and Resistance in Hispanic Cinema. 
  
 Elective classes
 The Latin American Short Story
  
  This course builds on and develops the knowledge on Latin American literature and culture acquired in Spanish and Latin American Studies II and III; and adds a dimension of theoretical analysis, as well as developing critical skills through a study of texts from the different countries of Latin America. 
 
 Shaping Spain: Ideas, Beliefs & Identity 
  
  Rooted in the Spanish History of Ideas, this course explores the condition and motivations for the development of some of the existing main currents of thought in Spain since 1989. It encourages a critical understanding of Spanish history and contextualises the work of several Spanish seminal thinkers (Unamuno, Ortega, Aza&ntilde;a and Zambrano) and it explores their thought in relation to the key themes of the course: ideas, beliefs, and identity. 
  
 