Course content 
 The Management Development Programme (MDP) is a core element of the undergraduate degree programme in the Strathclyde Business School. 
 The programme runs for the first three years of the BA degree. The entire class is driven by real business problems. The approach to learning is active problem-based, with students working in project teams. 
 The class aims to encourage integration of the knowledge and experience gained in Principal Subjects. Each year of the MDP focuses on different aspects of business and the content of MDP is constantly evolving and being updated and enhanced. 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Business Enterprise  
 Creativity & Innovation Management 
 
   This class aims to provide you with a rigorous understanding of creativity and innovation through an intensive blend of theoretical and experiential learning activities. You'll be strongly encouraged to submit your work to relevant business/innovation competitions (e.g. the Scottish Institute for Enterprise Young Innovators Competition and the New York City Big Idea Innovation Challenge). 
  
 Finance 
 Course summary
  
  Students will receive an introduction to: 
   
   finance and accounting, which covers the basic principles of investment and value 
   the valuation of bonds and shares 
   investment decisions in business companies 
   accounting methods 
   
 
 Year 2 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
  
 Business Enterprise  
 Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice 
  
  This class is intended to give you a broad understanding of entrepreneurship, the arenas in which entrepreneurship is practiced, and the role of the entrepreneur in economy and society. The practical component will introduce you to entrepreneurship in the real world through engagement with entrepreneurs and the entrepreneurial process (e.g. guest lectures, cases, desk research, and group work). 
 
 New Venture Planning 
 
   This class is designed to provide a practical introduction to drawing up business plans and understanding how new ventures are managed and developed. It will not follow the traditional lecture pattern but will be highly interactive. You'll be involved in individual and group activities which will encourage creative thinking and “learning by doing” in addressing the real opportunities and challenges that face the first-time entrepreneur.﻿ 
     
  
 Elective classes
 Introduction to Business Start-Up
 
   Through this class, you're given the opportunity to appreciate the complexity of decision making in managing the initial and development stages of a start-up company. You have the opportunity to experience the complexity of the entrepreneurial process though a simulation. The overall aim of the class is to raise your awareness of the key concepts of new venture development, how small businesses operate and what influences success or failure. 
 
 Technology Entrepreneurship & Commercialisation
  
  This class aims for you to better appreciate management challenges of a complex, uncertain, and interdisciplinary high-tech business environment. This class attempts to bridge the gap between researchers, technologists and the mainstream customer and to provide engineers and scientists with a better understanding of what it takes to create and grow technology-based businesses. 
  
 Finance 
 Course summary
  
  Second year classes cover: 
   
   investment and financial decision-making and policies in business 
   risk and return and the pricing of company shares 
   portfolio selection and the efficiency of financial markets 
   the valuation of bonds and bond portfolio management 
   equity trading strategies 
   statistical and spreadsheet methods of analysing financial problems and strategies 
   
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Business Enterprise  
 Entrepreneurial Capital & Resources 
 
   This class provides an intense grounding in entrepreneurial capital. The need for both capability and commitment are stressed. After a grounding in the theoretical and empirical literature on entrepreneurial capital, you'll enhance your own entrepreneurial capital through a set of practical assignments. The class aims to build your awareness of different forms of entrepreneurial capital and build their effectiveness in entrepreneurial finance.﻿ 
     
 
 Venture Management Strategy & Growth
 
   Having established a good understanding of the economic and social impact of entrepreneurship, opportunity identification, and starting and resourcing a new venture in previous modules, in this class you're presented with the challenges and opportunities of managing and growing the venture in a sustainable way. Through working with local businesses, you'll have the opportunity to assess the management practices of Scottish SMEs and consult them on their growth strategies.﻿ 
     
  
 Finance 
 Course summary
  
  Areas covered in third year classes include: 
   
   advanced corporate finance and financial markets issues 
   valuation of derivatives, such as options and futures and swaps 
   the operations of derivatives markets 
   hedging strategies 
   treasury and international financial risk management in business 
   
  Advanced methods of empirical analysis, such as event studies, and access to historic and live data are also included. 
 
 Year 4 
 Business Enterprise  
 Venture Management in Practice
 
   The class investigates the entrepreneurial and management issues associated with the growth of an established venture. It allows you to extend and build on your knowledge of entrepreneurship and small firms, by investigating internal and external issues faced by growth oriented ventures; as they seek to grow in a sustainable way through the application multiple capital resources. You'll have the opportunity to apply your knowledge and understanding in a real situation by undertaking an individual applied business development project, within an established entrepreneurial venture.  ﻿ 
     
 
 International Entrepreneurship 
 
   This class is designed to highlight the growing importance of entrepreneurship in the international arena and to enable you to understand both the entry modes for international entrepreneurship and the typical obstacles faced by entrepreneurs and SMEs in moving into the international arena.   
     
 
 Research Methods 
 
   In Honours year, you should develop as an independent learner who can demonstrate the ability to conduct research independently within the Business Enterprise discipline. The module is supported with a Research Methods class, which aims to enhance your research skills.﻿ 
     
 
 Family Business Theory & Practice 
 
   The class examines the distinctive advantages and unique challenges that face family firms and builds an enhanced appreciation of the different perspectives of the various stakeholders associated with family business. It allows you to extend your knowledge of entrepreneurship and small firms by considering the specific dynamics of family ownership. The class will benefit from the input of guest speakers, including owners of family firms.﻿ 
     
 
 Issues & Trends in Entrepreneurship 
 
   This class will provide an opportunity to explore contemporary, emerging and cutting edge themes in entrepreneurship theory and practice. It will provide you with up-to-date and relevant insights into contemporary academic thinking on the entrepreneurship discipline, insights from practicing ‘master’ entrepreneurs and exposure to emerging trends that will shape the future entrepreneurial landscape. This course builds on the academic content of previous courses with in-depth exposure to contemporary academic theories and empirical studies on entrepreneurship.﻿ 
     
  
 Finance 
 Course summary
  
  You can either specialise in Finance as a Single Honours subject or continue to a Joint Honours degree in Finance and your other principal subject. In order to gain entry to Honours year, you must meet specified performance criteria in Years 2 and 3. 
  Students taking Single Honours in Finance will do a research dissertation in Finance, while Joint Honours students typically have the choice of doing their dissertation in either Finance or their other subject. Honours classes cover advanced topics in the following areas: 
   
   corporate investment 
   corporate financing 
   asset pricing 
   portfolio analysis 
   derivatives 
   international financial management 
   behavioural finance 
   international corporate governance 
   financial quantitative methods 
   
  
 