Course content 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Hospitality & Tourism 
 Introduction to Hospitality & Tourism Management
  
  This class introduces you to key issues and concepts in relation to hospitality and tourism management. Gradually you're immersed into the sector and key issues while you apply theories from different fields to the understanding of Hospitality and Tourism.   
  
 Business Analysis 
 Foundations of Business Analysis & Technology 
  
  Business Analysis & Technology is the study of how analytical thinking, scientific method and tools can be used to help decision making. This class aims to introduce a variety of analytical methods that form the basis of analysing any business problem as well as provide students with an overview of technological change and how it affects all aspects of an organisation. 
  The aims of this class are: 
   
   To raise awareness of the real world problems encountered by industry that can be solved through Management Science methodology 
   To develop an understanding of the tools and techniques used by business analysts 
   To provide students with an awareness of why and where organisations use technology 
   To highlight the integrative role of technology within organisations 
   To demonstrate the dynamic nature of technology 
   
 
 Year 2 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
  
 Hospitality & Tourism 
 Service Encounter Management
  
  In the hospitality and tourism sector, much of the customer engagement and value delivery takes place within the service encounter. In this class you'll learn how the management of this dynamic environment requires an integrated approach where customers, employees and the service setting itself require to be managed. 
 
 Destination Marketing Management
  
  Nations, regions and cities: destinations are products for Hospitality and Tourism, inward investment and higher education. You'll explore challenges in managing and marketing destinations across organisational and product boundaries using a range of industry contexts.   
  
 Business Analysis 
 Semester 1
 Analysing & Improving Operations 
  
  This class is one of the two undergraduate Business Analysis & Technology classes before the Honours year that apply various approaches to Operations Management problems. Following on from the fundamentals in the first year class, this class introduces you to the subject of Operations Management in detail and provides opportunity for you to apply some of the basic decision analysis techniques in this context.﻿ 
  
 Semester 2
 Managing Business Processes & Information Systems 
  
  This class forms a bridge between the first year class and more advanced classes in Enterprise Resource Planning, Business Process Outsourcing, the role of ICT in business environment, etc. 
  The class will seek to combine conceptual and technical skills, and it will provide the basis for a series of classes in third and Honours years, especially in areas of Business Process Integration with ERP, organisational innovation and E-commerce. 
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Hospitality & Tourism  
 Industry Placement
  
  You have the opportunity to gain experience working with industry professionals, to develop practical skills and reflective practice and to build networks for possible future employment. You'll reflect upon and evaluate not only your own performance, but also the organisation, its output or key activities, and broader social, cultural and economic role. 
 
 Events Management
  
  In this class you'll work in a team to design, organise, run and evaluate your own event for charity. Through this practical exercise, you'll be exposed to the realities and challenges of events management and teamwork. This class adds to the experiential content of the Hospitality & Tourism Management programme whilst retaining rigorous theoretical underpinnings and strong coverage of events management at an advanced level. 
 
 Developing Theory into Action
  
  Using academic theory and literature, combined with real life industry practice, you'll develop your abilities to draw out understanding of the value of management theory and link its relevance to the management practice; second, you'll also develop the ability of critical self-reflection as a future practising manager. 
  
 Business Analysis 
 Semester 1
 Understanding & Optimising Business Systems 
  
  The first part of the course will introduce and build experience in two problem structuring methods, SODA and Soft Systems Methodology. The second part will establish an overall understanding of how supply chains work as well as appropriate modelling approaches to address various operational challenges. The third part of the course will introduce basic mathematical optimisation modelling and present how it can be used to tackle problems in different business systems, including applications in supply chains. 
  The fourth and final part of the course will introduce the students to the ideas of Multi-criteria Decision Analysis to make students aware of the importance of carefully defining objectives when intervening in business systems. Overall, the course will equip students with the qualitative and quantitative analytic skills and techniques in order to make action recommendations for performance improvements in complex business systems. 
  
 Semester 2
 Knowledge & Innovation Management
  
  In this class, students will develop a comprehensive picture about knowledge and innovation. It goes to the very basis of what constitutes knowledge and knowledge work, and, based on this, develops the notion of creativity, as creation of new knowledge, and subsequently conceptualises innovation as new value created from the new knowledge. 
 
 Year 4 
 Hospitality & Tourism  
 Hospitality & Tourism Analysis: Case Studies & Case Histories
  
  This class uses case studies from Hospitality & Tourism and challenges aspects of learning in previous classes. It'll further your understanding and appreciation of the nature of hospitality and tourism too. It encourages reflection on some realities of hospitality and tourism which do not fit neatly into theoretical boxes.   
 
 Being an Ethical Manager
  
  The nature and application of business ethics in contemporary management are explored in this class. It raises key ethical issues from both cultural and stakeholder perspectives and balances them with philosophical and pragmatic considerations. It'll provide you with a clear understanding of the dichotomy between philosophical idealism and the pragmatic considerations of ethical leadership for practical management. 
 
 Management, Enterprise & the Rise of the Global Economy
  
  Inspired by the Harvard approach to management education this class explores three principles of management: 
   
   business strategies are understood through reflection on the complex realities faced by enterprises in competitive arenas 
   firms can only be understood within the context of market dynamics 
   the contemporary situation can never be divorced from the past 
   
 
 Strategy & Leadership
  
  This class will develop your knowledge of strategy and provide insights as to how current and aspiring business leaders can manage strategically. You'll have an enhanced understanding of how individuals within an organisation can effectively lead and manage strategy in a complex and challenging world. 
 
 Family Business: Theory & Practice
  
  The hospitality and tourism industry has a large number of family businesses. Given the prevalence of family businesses – estimates suggest that almost 80% of new ventures are born as family firms and about 60% of the UK’s 4.2 million enterprises are family firms – graduates employed within the SME sector are likely to be employed by family-owned firms. The class examines the distinctive advantages and unique challenges that face family firms. 
  
 Business Analysis 
 Management Science 4
  
  An important aspect of this class is the experiential learning element, where you'll work in teams on management science projects, directly for external clients. 
  The clients will introduce their problems, provide information during the project, and listen to your recommended solutions. These client projects will be chosen to highlight the differing nature of individual practice, allowing comparisons between qualitative and quantitative projects to be explored. 
  Alongside the experiential learning will be a reflective element, which will focus on issues relating to client, consultant relations and implementation of management science, as well as addressing more conceptual issues relating to problem structuring, modelling, data collection, and choosing and mixing methods in the light of your growing experience. 
  Professional and ethical considerations will be highlighted, introducing you to the areas of agreement and debate within the profession. This class will also include an individual or small group project, where you'll select a technique or method they haven’t previously studied to research in more depth, mirroring professional development that they will undertake in practice. This component of the class will be managed through learning contracts. 
 
 Business Analytics Using Data Mining
  
  This class builds upon students understanding of information systems. It'll provide you with the opportunity to develop analytical approaches for mining data using commercial software that'll be intellectually challenging and useful. 
  This class focuses on the methods used for mining data, complementing the other Honours classes that provide business context and processes. 
 
 Risk Analysis & Management
  
  Identifying and managing risk is a fundamental skill required by managers. Many models exist for supporting risk assessment and this is a major area of interest within the Management Science department. 
  This class will introduce you to the general concepts of risk and common measures used as well as considering ways of modelling and interpreting technical risk within the context of managing complex systems in areas such as transportation, aerospace, health. 
  It'll develop knowledge and skills introduced in years 1-3 in operations, statistics and modelling classes by integrating and extending them within the context of risk assessment. 
 
 Business Process Integration with Enterprise Resource Planning
  
  This class investigates the application of sophisticated business technology systems to the management and, more particularly, integration of business processes. 
  In doing so, it builds directly on the knowledge and skills acquired as part of Management of Business Processes and, in a more indirect manner, on classes like Technological and Organisational Innovation, Information Systems in the Knowledge Economy, and Information Systems Support for Managers. 
  
 