Course content 
 Year 1 
 French 
 Year 1
  
  Students take two combined classes: French 1A (semester 1), French 1B (semester 2). These courses are mainly organised around a linguistic progression towards level B1 in the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. There is a regular input of cultural background which takes the form of three lectures in semester 1 and two in semester 2 covering the following topics: 
   
 
 The Making of Modern France 
 France in a Global Context 
 Understanding the French Republic 
 French Identities 
 Contemporary French Society   
 
   
  In addition, there is an introductory lecture in semester 2 entitled ‘What is translation about?’ 
  
 Law 
 Criminal Law
  
  This course considers everything from the theory of why and how someone is held responsible for criminal actions, to many specific crimes, including murder, the less serious crimes of personal violence, crimes of dishonesty, breach of the peace and attempting to pervert the course of justice. 
 
 Law & Society
  
  This class engages with some challenging problems faced by law within contemporary society. It introduces students to some aspects of the social, political, and ethical conditions in which law operates. It deals with the interaction of law with justice, politics, morals and equality. The course will examine the role and challenges of law in times of social change. The course is structured around three key themes: 
   
   legal reasoning 
   law & politics 
   law & social change 
   
     
 
 Legal Methods
  
  The aims of this class are to: 
   
   provide students with a basic knowledge of the history, structure and institutions of the Scottish legal system 
   provide students with the skills required to find, interpret and analyse the law applicable in Scotland, from all their various sources 
   introduce students to competing conceptions of law 
   introduce students to legal reasoning 
   
 
 Voluntary Obligations: Contract & Promises
  
  While the most obvious aim of this course is to familiarise students with Scottish contract law and voluntary obligations, this aim may be divided into a number of sub-aims. They are as follows: 
   
   to place voluntary obligations within the general framework of Scots Law 
   to place the Scots law of voluntary obligations within its European context 
   to analyse and explain how contracts and promises are formed 
   to analyse and explain how voluntary obligations may be vitiated and on what grounds their validity may be challenged 
   to analyse and explain the substance of contracts and how the inclusion and exclusion of rights and liabilities is circumscribed by law 
   to analyse and explain how contracts break down or otherwise come to an end and the remedies available when they do 
   
 
 Public Law 1
  
  Following on from the introduction to the constitution – its key actors, institutions and their functions – in Public Law 1, students taking Public Law 2 will build upon that knowledge here: first by focusing on the ways in which legal (judicial review) and quasi-legal (tribunals, public inquiries, ombudsmen) bodies supervise the exercise of constitutional and administrative decision making; secondly, by a detailed analysis of the political and legal mechanisms which exist for the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms. As such, Public Law 2 is concerned with the abuse of power, and the ways and means by which power can be limited and held to account – whether that is the power of a golf club to suspend an unruly member, the power of a local authority to order the compulsory purchase of privately owned property, or the power of the Prime Minister to wage war. 
 
 Year 2  
 French
 
 Students take two language classes as in Year 1. The language courses are based on a series of classes.
  
 Le Monde du Travail
  
  Cultural focus:  time (35 hour week, RTT and ‘ponts’, paternity/maternity leave, …) & ‘human resources’ (hierarchical organisation, discrimination, unions, relocation,…) 
  Linguistic focus: the negation, asking questions, using pronouns. 
 
 La France et L'Europe 
  
  Cultural focus: the origins of the European ideal, Europe and the EU viewed from France. 
  Linguistic focus: subjunctive mood. 
 
 Immigration & Nationalit&eacute;
  
  Cultural focus: a historical view of immigration in France and a look at the specificity of the French ‘integration’ system. 
  Linguistic focus: the system of tenses in French (concentrating on past tenses). 
 
 Les Femmes en Politique 
  
  Cultural focus: a further look (after first year) at French politics, concentrating on topical issues. 
  Linguistic focus: modal verbs. 
 
 Les R&eacute;gions
  
  Cultural focus: decentralisation, importance of regions in France. 
  Linguistic focus: the passive voice. 
 
 L’&Eacute;conomie
  
  Cultural focus: the French economy (role of the state, …), marketing &agrave; la fran&ccedil;aise 
  Linguistic focus: equivalent of –ing in French. 
  In addition, students specialising in French take  the French  Culture and History 2 class. This class focuses on the Occupation and French Colonialism/Decolonisation. The historical context for each topic is first set, and documents from the two periods studied, before discussion moves on to the cultural domain, via analysis of the following texts and films: 
   
   Au Revoir les Enfants (film, Malle) 
   Stupeur et Tremblements (text, Nothomb) 
   L'&Eacute;tranger (text, Camus) 
   Le Samourai (film, Melville) 
   Anthology of historical texts relating to the Second World War 
   Anthology of historical texts relating to French Colonialism/Immigration 
   
  
 Law 
 Public Law 2 
  
  Following on from Public Law 1, Public Law 2 aims to consolidate knowledge and understanding of constitutional and administrative law. Students taking this class will require to have taken Public Law 1 in the first year. It'll build upon knowledge of the key concepts and institutions of the UK constitution. As a second year class, its rationale is to give students the opportunity to progress from an understanding of the constitution to an understanding of the role of the law in the constitutional control of public power. This course encourages students to adopt an evaluative and critical stance towards ongoing constitutional developments. The course will focus on control of administrative action, both by the judiciary and by ombudsmen. The protection of individual rights will be a key feature, focusing on judicial protection but also encompassing the role of human rights institutions in the UK and Scotland. The future control of public power will be discussed, including topical debates concerning constitutional reform in this area. 
 
 Domestic Relations
  
  Family law concerns the control which the law exerts over domestic relationships and families; it affects everyone to a greater or lesser degree. 
  Topics include: 
   
   the legal status of children, parental responsibilities and rights and the upbringing of children - including issues in adoption and fostering, local authority care and the Children's Hearing system 
   legal consequences of marriage/civil partnership 
   divorce - including what happens to the family and its financial consequences 
   unmarried domestic relations, opposite-sex and same-sex 
   
 
 Commercial Law
  
  Commercial law is a second year compulsory subject on the LLB (and LML) degree. The class provides students with an understanding of commercial law in a Scottish context. It partially meets the commercial law subject requirements and related skills outcomes of the Law Society of Scotland and the Faculty of Advocates (albeit that some of the commercial professional topics, eg sale of goods and insurance law, are dealt with by other courses). 
  Building on the knowledge acquired by students in first year, the general academic objective of the course is to examine the basic principles and rules concerning core aspects of commercial law, including the main principles of agency, partnership and company law, the law relating to various methods of payment (including consumer credit and bills of exchange) the rules governing the ways in which creditors can ‘secure’ repayment of a debt (eg through taking personal guarantees from third parties for repayment of the debt, or by establishing rights in security over debtor property); the basic principles of diligence; the consequences of both corporate and individual debtor inability to repay debts (corporate insolvency and personal bankruptcy respectively). 
  While the focus of the class is on ‘a black letter’ analysis of relevant statutory and common law in the broad commercial area, in order to aid understanding of relevant principles, the class also examines the policy rationales underlying the current law and recent and projected reforms in this area. 
 
 Involuntary Obligations: Delict & Unjustified Enrichment
  
  The design of this class is primarily aimed at enhancing students’ ability to read cases, deal with case law and apply the techniques of case-analysis and common law development. 
  The student will acquire an in-depth and up to date knowledge and understanding, from both a legal and a social perspective, of the rules of law governing involuntary obligations, that is to say the law of delict and the law of unjustified enrichment. 
  Students will acquire the ability to apply the rules of law to particular fact situations in order to provide definitive answers to the problems exposed in these situations. 
  Students will develop critical and reasoning skills, giving them the ability to make and present personal and informed judgments on the rules of law and their application within the domestic legal system. 
 
 Property Trusts & Succession
  
  The general rationale of this class is to provide students with a contemporary understanding of the law of property, trusts and succession in Scotland, and to meet Law Society of Scotland requirements in this subject-area. 
 
 EU Law 
  
  The EU law class focuses on the constitutional and institutional order of the EU as well as on the internal market. To this end, the class looks at the European integration process, the EU institutions, EU competences, the decision-making process within the EU, the principles underpinning the EU legal order and the principles governing the internal market. 
 
 Year 3 
 French
 Students take two language classes (as in previous years). 
 L’Esclavage Moderne 
  
  Cultural focus: a historical review of slavery and a look at modern forms of slavery. 
  Linguistic focus: reinforcement work on subjunctive mood, passive voice and negative forms. 
 
 Les Nouvelles Fa&ccedil;ons de Consommer
  
  Cultural focus: the impact of consumerism on the environment. 
  Linguistic focus: adjectives and comparative, hypothesis, conditional mood. 
 
 Le Syst&egrave;me &Eacute;ducatif
  
  Cultural focus: a look at current issues in the French education system. 
  Linguistic focus: reported speech, imperative mood, a further look at pronouns. 
 
 L’Ann&eacute;e &agrave; l’&Eacute;tranger
  
  Cultural focus: practical module  aiming at preparing students for the year abroad. 
  There is also a French Studies 3 class: Freedom and Identity in France and the Francophone world. This class is based on the study of the following texts and films as examples of the treatment of the class’s twin themes: 
   
   Milou en mai  (film, Malle) 
   Poverty (various texts) 
   The Dreyfus Affair (various historical texts) 
   Monsieur Klein (film, Losey) 
   Rue des Boutiques Obscures  (text, Modiano) 
   National Identity in the Third Republic (various historical texts) 
   
  
 Law 
 Compulsory classes
 Evidence
  
  The main focus of the course is on providing an overview of how the handling and proving of facts works in law and how this interacts with the law of evidence. The emphasis is on understanding and application, rather than the learning of the specific details of legal rules. 
  The course has three general academic aims: 
   
   to introduce students to theoretical and practical issues relating to the use and proof of facts in the Scottish legal system 
   introduce students to the central concepts, rules and principles of the Scots law of Evidence 
   give students an understanding of the interrelationship between the theory, practice and law relating to the use and proof of facts in the Scottish legal system 
   
  
 Elective classes
 Law, Film & Popular Culture
 
   This class develops general concerns with the nature and function of law which are key elements in the wide-ranging theoretical, non-subject specific (or meta-law) classes taught within the Law School – Law and Society, Sociology of Law, Legal Theory and Criminology. 
 
 Legal Theory
  
  The main aim of this class is to introduce students to the major theoretical ideas and values of law, and to debates about those ideas and values, thereby enhancing their understanding of law in general. 
  The class explores relationships between law and morality, law and society and between law and power. In doing so, the course also explores what we mean by law, morality and power. The course requires students to work on their own and make an oral presentation and trains then in concise thinking. 
 
 Housing Law
  
  The aim of the class is to introduce the student to the law of landlord and tenant, and to concepts of housing need and market allocation of housing resources and the different ways in which such concepts are interpreted and operated in modern Britain.   The method of teaching and assessing the class is designed to enhance learning, academic and transferable skills. 
 
 International Private Law
  
  This class aims to provide students with an understanding of the problems inherent in situations involving a foreign element and the basic concepts and principles of Scots international private law. More particularly, attention will be given to the rules which establish when the Scottish court has jurisdiction in any case involving a foreign element. The class will also determine the applicable law in cases involving international elements heard before a Scottish court and the rules on recognition and enforcement of judgments in certain contexts. 
  The International private law rules in relation to: 
   
   contract 
   delict 
   marriage 
   divorce & nullity 
   parent & child 
   property 
   insolvency & succession 
   
  This class is not recommended for Erasmus exchange students. 
 
 Competition Law
  
  Most industrialised countries, and the European Union now have elaborate laws, rules and procedures for ensuring the maintenance of a competitive economy. This course looks at how the competition laws of the United Kingdom and the European Union affect how business operates in Britain. 
  If you're contemplating a career in business, or are simply a consumer, some knowledge of competition is useful. If you're a student of industrial economics, or of marketing, some knowledge of competition law is a wise precaution. Moreover there are considerably more job opportunities in this area, whether as an economic adviser, legal practitioner or in-house lawyer advising on effective compliance. 
 
 Discrimination Law
  
  Although we are all equal in the law, some are treated more equally than others. This module examines the nature of discrimination and some of the reasons for it, and the history of the law which tries to prohibit it and promote equality. The class looks in depth at the Equality Act 2010 and relevant case law. It covers the protected characteristics, direct and indirect discrimination, harassment, victimisation and disability discrimination, including the duty to make reasonable adjustments. As well as individual anti-discrimination law in employment and goods and services, the class examines preventive and pro-active measures, including positive action and the public equality duty and the arguments around their nature. 
  