Course content 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Management 
 Managing in a Global Context
  
  This class will introduce you to the concept of the organisation and the manager’s role within it. It will further provide the grounding required to prepare you for the more complex and specialised subject matter to come both in general management and in international business.   
  
 Hospitality & Tourism 
 Introduction to Hospitality & Tourism Management
  
  This class introduces you to key issues and concepts in relation to hospitality and tourism management. Gradually you're immersed into the sector and key issues while you apply theories from different fields to the understanding of Hospitality and Tourism.   
 
 Year 2 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
  
 Management 
 Organisational Analysis & Strategy
  
  This class will analyse contemporary management and organisation by examining the different ways of ‘doing business’ implied by different organisational forms. This approach to organisational analysis suggests that too often the study of management and organisation fails to recognise the importance of different structural forms in the evaluation of management and organisation. The argument to be developed throughout the class is that there is a need to engage in structural analyses of organisations and to understand better the relationship of organisations to the wider structures in which they are embedded and how this impacts upon both the strategic direction but also the day-to-day management of a business. 
 
 Understanding Change in Organisations
  
  This class recognises that change permeates all aspects of organisational life and that understanding change is crucial to effective management.   It'll familiarise students with the implications for change of a world that is increasingly globalised and internationalised, where public, private and 3rd sector organisations are often in continuous upheaval due to turbulent economies, to reforming imperatives, and radical new technologies. 
  
 Hospitality & Tourism 
 Service Encounter Management
  
  In the hospitality and tourism sector, much of the customer engagement and value delivery takes place within the service encounter. In this class you'll learn how the management of this dynamic environment requires an integrated approach where customers, employees and the service setting itself require to be managed. 
 
 Destination Marketing Management
  
  Nations, regions and cities: destinations are products for Hospitality and Tourism, inward investment and higher education. You'll explore challenges in managing and marketing destinations across organisational and product boundaries using a range of industry contexts.   
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Management 
 Management Industry Placement
  
  This class provides students with the opportunity to gain first-hand experience working with business professionals, to develop practical and reflective skills in an industry context, and to build networks for possible future work and learning. It also provides the opportunity to apply theories studied in other classes to the analysis and interpretation of industry practices.   
 
 Contemporary Trends in Management Practice
  
  Management trends and fashions have been increasingly deployed in organisational practice and scrutinised in scholarly contexts over the last thirty years. Many of these practices, often referred to as ideas, tools and methods, have gained fashion status, waxing and waning in popularity over time. A large number of them have failed in practice largely due to unrealistic expectations and the complexity of organisational contexts in which they are adopted. This class is based upon student requests to learn more about contemporary management trends and the social and political factors which facilitate and undermine their application.   
 
 Developing Theory into Practice
  
  In order to work effectively in organisations and manage complex, multi-faceted situations, managers need to develop their abilities to work with management theories to inform their practice and vice versa. Managers need to know what constitutes good or best practice, for which they need the skills of critical reflexivity. This means they can adapt their theories in use for specific situations. This class seeks to develop the skills of critical reflexivity so that students can become more aware of their own learning process and how to apply them in context. 
  
 Hospitality & Tourism 
 Industry Placement
  
  You have the opportunity to gain experience working with industry professionals, to develop practical skills and reflective practice and to build networks for possible future employment. You'll reflect upon and evaluate not only your own performance, but also the organisation, its output or key activities, and broader social, cultural and economic role. 
 
 Events Management
  
  In this class you'll work in a team to design, organise, run and evaluate your own event for charity. Through this practical exercise, you'll be exposed to the realities and challenges of events management and teamwork. This class adds to the experiential content of the Hospitality & Tourism Management programme whilst retaining rigorous theoretical underpinnings and strong coverage of events management at an advanced level. 
 
 Developing Theory into Action
  
  Using academic theory and literature, combined with real life industry practice, you'll develop your abilities to draw out understanding of the value of management theory and link its relevance to the management practice; second, you'll also develop the ability of critical self-reflection as a future practising manager. 
 
 Year 4 
 Management 
 Contemporary Issues in Management
  
  This class explores important concepts and debates centred on the working lives of managers. It'll draw on a range of conceptual ideas in organisational analysis to investigate numerous contentious issues that not only lie at the heart of academic debate but also confront managers as they go about their daily lives.   
 
 Management, Enterprise & the Rise of the Global Economy
  
  This class embraces three principles of management: 
   
   business strategies and management practices might best be understood through reflection on the complex realities faced by enterprises in competitive arenas at home and abroad 
   firms can only be understood within the context of market dynamics and the economic, social, political and cultural forces bearing upon markets 
   companies and their contemporary situation can never be divorced from their past 
   
 
 Strategy & Leadership 
  
  Taking a view that, in practice, strategy is something that people do rather than something organisations have, this class aims to develop understanding and insights into how current and aspiring business leaders can manage strategically. An experiential learning approach, based on exploring case examples through workshops, is adopted to: 
   
   surface insights into the complexities and challenges of being a strategic business leader 
   critically assess the scope and relative merits of different strategic management mechanisms and leadership approaches   
   encourage self-reflection and self-awareness 
   When you complete this class, you'll have an enhanced understanding of how individuals within an organisation can effectively lead and manage strategy in a complex and challenging world.
   
 
 Dynamics of Organising
  
  This class will build on Understanding Change in Organisations by developing an advanced view of the processes of organising. The distinctively dynamic character of key theories will be framed in terms of the philosophical contrast between ‘becoming’ and ‘being’ ideas as described by Tsoukas & Chia (2002). Research methodologies that are appropriate for this dynamic approach, such as conversation/discourse analysis, longitudinal and real-time data collection, and issues of researcher reflexivity, will also be explored. Understanding of these dynamic theories of organising will be deepened through application to topics of practical managerial concern such as: strategising, institutional change, identity construction, communities of practice, innovation and creativity, socially constructed change, change leadership, sense making, complex responsive processes, emotions and aesthetics of change.   
 
 Being an Ethical Manager
  
  Given the increased attention on business leaders and the perceived emphasis on corporate social responsibility, this class looks at ethical leadership by focusing on the nature and application of business ethics and contemporary leadership. It raises key ethical issues from both cultural and stakeholder perspectives and balances them with philosophical and pragmatic considerations. It'll provide you with a clear understanding of the dichotomy between philosophical idealism and the pragmatic considerations of ethical leadership and the challenges of ethical decision making.        
  
 Hospitality & Tourism 
 Hospitality & Tourism Analysis: Case Studies & Case Histories
  
  This class uses case studies from Hospitality & Tourism and challenges aspects of learning in previous classes. It'll further your understanding and appreciation of the nature of hospitality and tourism too. It encourages reflection on some realities of hospitality and tourism which do not fit neatly into theoretical boxes.   
 
 Being an Ethical Manager
  
  The nature and application of business ethics in contemporary management are explored in this class. It raises key ethical issues from both cultural and stakeholder perspectives and balances them with philosophical and pragmatic considerations. It'll provide you with a clear understanding of the dichotomy between philosophical idealism and the pragmatic considerations of ethical leadership for practical management. 
 
 Management, Enterprise & the Rise of the Global Economy
  
  Inspired by the Harvard approach to management education this class explores three principles of management: 
   
   business strategies are understood through reflection on the complex realities faced by enterprises in competitive arenas 
   firms can only be understood within the context of market dynamics 
   the contemporary situation can never be divorced from the past 
   
 
 Strategy & Leadership
  
  This class will develop your knowledge of strategy and provide insights as to how current and aspiring business leaders can manage strategically. You'll have an enhanced understanding of how individuals within an organisation can effectively lead and manage strategy in a complex and challenging world. 
 
 Family Business: Theory & Practice
  
  The hospitality and tourism industry has a large number of family businesses. Given the prevalence of family businesses – estimates suggest that almost 80% of new ventures are born as family firms and about 60% of the UK’s 4.2 million enterprises are family firms – graduates employed within the SME sector are likely to be employed by family-owned firms. The class examines the distinctive advantages and unique challenges that face family firms. 
 
 Strategic Marketing
  
  The mission of this class is to provide students with a clear understanding of how to formulate business strategies using marketing concepts and theories. The course will review the tools necessary to analyse business cases, particularly looking at companies that are in the forefront of business today. It also provides an overview of the marketing plan and attention will be on the implications for planning and strategy development. 
  
 