Course content 
 Year 1 
 Design Studies 1A
  
  TO SHELTER PART 1 
  The first architecture design studio project introduces you to the whole of the architectural design process; as a collaborative process, from conceptualisation and inception, through design development and resolution, to full size realisation and construction. 
 
 Design Studies 1B
  
  TO SHELTER PART 2 
  You'll investigate the fundamental need of man “to shelter”. The project concentrates on the ‘setting’ - the connection of “inside to outside” and the implications of making a mark in the landscape. 
 
 Design Studies 1C 
  
  To Dwell 
  You're introduced to the challenges of designing to a brief within the context of the urban environment. The specific issue explored is the nature of domesticity - what it means “to dwell”. 
 
 Design Studies 1D
  
  TO SETTLE 
  You'll engage with real clients in order to develop a programmatic response, delivering a public building in the city. 
 
 Experiencing Architecture 1
  
  ARB/RIBA Part 1 (Communication) 
  The Design Studies programme is supported by a compulsory series of associated discussion sessions and workshops in communication skills and media under the banner experiencing architecture. 
 
 Cultural Studies 1
  
  This class introduces you to a broad overview of the cultural context of architecture. You'll be encouraged to develop confidence in observing and commenting on architecture of all periods, and to express yourself clearly and accurately in spoken and written communication. 
 
 Technology Studies 1
  
  The class is the first stage of student education regarding the building and environmental technology aspects of architectural design. 
  The course introduces an elemental understanding of: 
   
   building structures 
   construction process 
   materiality 
   architectural detail 
   building physics 
   sustainability and environmental responsibility and control 
   
 
 Year 2 
 Design Studies 2A
  
  TO BELONG 
  You'll investigate what it means ‘to belong’ through a series of small projects taken to develop an understanding of architectural programme in relation to context. 
 
 Design Studies 2B
  
  TO GATHER 
  You'll investigate what it means “to gather”, understood as a basic human need, to congregate communally in celebration of shared values. You'll be asked to design a medium scaled public facility dedicated to communal activity. 
 
 Design Studies 2C
  
  TO LEARN 
  The final design project for the second year studio focuses on the programmatic activity of what it means “to learn”. This allows you to examine a single building programme in-depth through a process of analysis and synthesis. 
 
 Experiencing Architecture 2
  
  The Design Studies programme is supported by a compulsory series of associated discussion sessions and workshops in communication skills and media under the banner 'Experiencing Architecture'. 
 
 Cultural Studies 2
  
  You're introduced to some of the key issues, historical movements and events that shaped and structured the modern built and cultural environment. You'll get an introduction to the origins of the modern city, from the birth of capitalism to the European avant-garde. 
 
 Technology Studies 2
  
  This class expands the knowledge base in terms of structural and construction systems introducing: 
   
   more complex building types 
   larger spanning structures 
   contemporary building materials 
   a variety of environmental engineering design skills relating to the design of buildings which will ensure human comfort 
   
 
 Elective Class
  
  You'll take an elective class amounting to 20 credits total from those described in the University Class Catalogue. 
  For students intending to take the International Exchange programme in Year 3, and to be eligible for the BSc in Architectural Studies with International Study, we recommend 20 credits of language. 
 
 Year 3 
 Design Studies 3A
  
  TO LIVE/TO WORK 
  The class is a semester long investigation into the nature of what it means to live and work in the urban realm through the design of an urban housing project, from feasibility to detailed investigation. 
 
 Design Studies 3B
  
  TO PLAY (UNDERGRADUATE THESIS) 
  You'll consider the architectural implications of what it means “to play”, as a collective cultural phenomenon examined against the urban context. The emphasis is on the notion of “performance” and its association to “the city”. 
 
 Cultural Studies 3
 
   You'll develop a critical evaluation of cultural theory and architectural history focusing on specific issues relating to the modern movement in architecture, its relationship to the city and the historical context regarding urbanity. 
 
 Technology Studies 3
 
   The third stage of the investigation of architectural technology aims to develop a detailed understanding of structural, construction and environmental systems. Also an ability to holistically integrate these systems and knowledge base within a complex architectural proposition. 
 
 Introduction to Practice
  
  The class introduces you to the key features of the architectural profession and the construction industry. It provides a forum for discussion on the emerging industry, profession and modes of practice. 
  You'll complete a digital academic portfolio in line with the requirements of Part 1, ARB/RIBA professional accreditation. 
 
 Year 4 
 Design Studies 4A
  
  To CARE (Part 1) 
  The class focuses on the design of a small programmatically complex, multi-functional urban building. The design exploration includes site and programme appraisal, the generation and systematic testing, analysing and appraising of design options with the aim of drawing conclusions in the design process. 
 
 Design Studies 4B
  
  To CARE (Part 2) 
  The class focuses on the design of a large programmatically simple, multi-functional urban building to be set within a specific urban character. It has to be developed to a detailed level sufficient to demonstrate the relationship between the overall architectural concept, spatial quality and related technical and environmental considerations. 
 
 Cultural Studies 4
  
  This class provides you with the opportunity to define, explore and articulate an area of investigation of your own interest in the production of an appropriately illustrated dissertation. You'll develop an argument and demonstrate a position using evidence from your research. 
 
 Special Study Project 4
  
  This individual project allows you to further the aims and outcomes of one of the key areas of the syllabus. The project is intended to provide a bridging mechanism between the taught coursework and potential Masters projects. 
  
 