Course content 
 Year 1 
 History 
 History 1A
  
  This class focuses on the history of the British Isles from 1700 to 1914. It was a period of phenomenal change in terms of who ruled the country, the main economic activities, emerging cultural expression and attitudes and the growth of British power overseas on an unprecedented scale. 
  In the class we'll use the British Isles as a historical 'laboratory' to discuss key themes that have shaped the modern world. 
  We'll look at: 
   
   the formation of the British state 
   the ideas that were shaped by the Enlightenment, in which Scottish writers played an important part 
   why Britain industrialised and Ireland did not 
   the often dire social consequences of industrialisation 
   how and why Britain created the Empire 
   the growth of British overseas trade will be looked at 
   the impact of Britain on Asian, African and American societies 
   the ideological effects of the American War of Independence, the French Revolution and the 1798 rebellion in Ireland 
   the meaning of Victorian values in Scotland and the development of modern political parties and the growth of democracy 
   the roles of gender and class in shaping modern British and Irish society 
   This class will enable students to understand the origins of both modern British society and the beginnings of an increasingly integrated global community. In the tutorials, each meeting will involve the examination of a key document or two, as well as a discussion of that week's topic. 
 
 History 1B
  
  This class follows on from History 1A and takes the story up to the end of the 20th century. We'll look at: 
   
   the effects of World War I on Scottish society and why Ireland broke away from the United Kingdom 
   the growth of the Labour Party and the rise of socialism will be traced 
   the effects of the Great Depression of the 1930s on British society 
   the reasons why the British government formulated a policy of appeasement, to show how foreign policy and domestic policy were inextricably linked 
   the impact of World War II on British society 
   the demands that led to the creation of the Welfare State will be explored 
   the new international realities facing Britain in 1945 
   the beginnings of the Cold War, to show how effectively Britain adapted to the loss of Great Power status 
   post-war society and the cultural revolution of the "Swinging Sixties". We'll ask whether a generation gap emerged 
   the long slow march of women's rights 
   the impact of immigration, to show the ways in which British society was changing fundamentally 
   the collapse of the traditional industrial economy in the 1980s and changes in Scottish family life, to show how social norms were being overturned 
   the advent and effects of devolution in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
   
  Just as in the first semester History class, we will use carefully selected documents in tutorials to help us analyse each topic. 
  
 Spanish 
 Spanish 1A 
  
  This course will further your knowledge of the Spanish language and develop the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in the Spanish language through intensive practical and communicative language work. This course aims to bring you up to level A2 of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. You'll extend your knowledge of the cultures of the Spanish-speaking world and focus on the development of contemporary Latin America and on how issues relating to it are reflected in its cultural production (for example, films, journalism, songs). 
 
 Spanish 1B 
  
  Following on from Spanish 1A, this course will broaden your knowledge of the Spanish language, and enhance basic skills already acquired in reading, writing, listening and speaking. This course aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. It'll also introduce you to new aspects of the culture of Spain through the materials used. Practical language activities, such as pair and small group work and intensive exposure to Spanish through audio, video and written texts, will enable you to progress from the levels achieved in Spanish 1A. Successful completion of this class will enable students to take Spanish 2A in semester 1 of second year. 
  
 or
 Introduction to Spanish 1A
  
  This course aims to give an introduction to the Spanish language, assuming limited or no previous knowledge of Spanish. It introduces everyday Spanish language, as well as certain aspects of the cultures of the Spanish-speaking world. The class is intended to help students to develop the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in basic Spanish. 
 
 Introduction to Spanish 1B 
  
  This course builds on and develops the knowledge acquired in Introduction to Spanish 1A. The class will broaden your knowledge of Spanish language and enhance skills already acquired of reading, writing, listening and speaking in basic Spanish. This class also introduces students to new aspects of the culture of the Spanish-speaking world. 
 
 Year 2 
 History
 
 Choose three from this list﻿
  
 Scotland: Renaissance and Reformation
  
  This course will focus on the period from the final establishment of the territorial boundaries of the Scottish kingdom in James III’s reign through to the Union of Crowns in 1603. In covering the era of the Renaissance and Reformation in Scotland, as well as the regnal union of 1603, it will focus on the reigns of successive Stewart monarchs and their subsequent accession to the English and Irish thrones, thereby creating a British imperial monarchy. 
  Scotland’s contact with Europe and its strained relations with England form core themes but political history will be studied in the light of the social, religious, economic and cultural developments that lend early-modern Scotland its distinct identity, thereby examining issues such as trade and economic development, the impact of the Renaissance in Scotland, literacy and the spread of reforming ideas, the arts, education and issues of identity. 
 
 Disease & Society
  
  This class provides a broad introduction to the historical relationship between diseases and human societies in the early modern and modern periods. 
  It examines the core thesis that diseases and other health conditions have had dramatic impacts on history, shaping economic relations, political and social structures and cultural and religious beliefs.   However, it also explores the reverse of this, the thesis that human activities, ideas and behaviours have radically altered the diseases and conditions that afflict our societies over the last five hundred years. 
  The course is grouped around three themes: 
   
   infectious disease 
   chronic disease 
   society's responses to disease 
   
  Lectures in the first two sections focus on exploring the origins of key diseases/debilities, the ways in which social structures/behaviours have caused or abetted these conditions, and their impacts on society, economics, politics and culture. 
  In the final section, lectures focus more on the ways in which societies have sought to conceptualise, control and cure diseases. The key questions that students should be able to answer by the end is how have diseases and debilities shaped human societies, and how have human societies shaped diseases and debilities? 
 
 History of Scotland 1700-1832
  
  This course will explore Scotland’s political, economic, religious, intellectual and social development in the aftermath of the Union of 1707 through to 1832.   The benefits, disadvantages and tensions that arose from the process of becoming part of the British state will be explored through such issues as: 
   
   causes and impact of union 
   the significance of Jacobitism 
   the nature and consequence of agricultural and industrial change 
   Empire 
   the role of the Scottish Enlightenment. 
   
 
 Modern Europe
  
  This class examines some of the principal developments in international history of twentieth century Europe. It pays particular attention to: 
   
   the causes of the First World War 
   the impact of the war upon the international system 
   the rise of new powers within the international community after 1919 
   the causes of the Second World War 
   the Cold War and the forces driving European integration since 1945 
   the role of the USA and USSR in recent European history 
   In terms of geographical coverage the class will seek to balance consideration of Europe-wide developments with finer-focus treatment of French, Italian and German history. The class will introduce students to some of the main debates in the academic literature and encourage them to look at a range of relevant primary sources.
   
  
 Spanish 
 Spanish 2A 
  
  This course will introduce you to more complex and formal areas of language, and enable you to develop further the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in the Spanish language. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the different cultures of Spain and Latin America through the materials used. Practical language activities such as pair and small group work and intensive exposure to the Spanish language through audio, video and written texts will build on what you already know, and give you a feel for the Spanish language as it is used in professional contexts. This course aims to bring you up to level A2+/B1 of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. 
 
 Spanish 2B 
  
  This course builds on and develops the knowledge acquired in Spanish 2A and will introduce you to yet more complex and formal areas of language, improving and developing further the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in the Spanish language. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Spain and Latin America through the materials used. Practical language activities such as pair and small group work and intensive exposure to the Spanish language through audio, video and written texts will build on what you already know, and give you a feel for the Spanish language as it is used in professional contexts. Successful completion of this class will enable students to take Spanish at third-year level. This course aims to bring you up to level B1+ of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. 
 
 Spanish and Latin American Studies II
  
  This course will explore the interlinked themes of independence and isolation in Spain and Latin America. The class is intended to give students a broad overview of Spanish and Latin American social, political and cultural history through the examination of specific texts and films, as well as to develop their critical and research skills. 
 
 Year 3 
 History 
 Oral History: Theory and Practice
  
  Please note that this is compulsory for students who wish to use oral history in their dissertation. 
  Oral history is a way of engaging with the past via the experiences and memories of those who were there. ‘Oral history’ is a multifaceted term that refers to the sources (interviews), the methodology (interviewing), theory (analysis), and products (of which there are many). 
  This new class aims to alert students to the possibilities of using oral history as a way of understanding the past. It will examine key concepts and methodologies in oral history and explore how oral history has helped to shape historical understanding. 
  This class also has an important practice-based focus – students taking the class will gain an opportunity to develop practical skills in oral history interviewing and analysis as well as to reflect critically on theory in relation to practice. They will also get an opportunity to explore the application and use of history in the public arena through engaging with work on oral history and public history. 
  Because of the practical nature of this class and the limited supply of equipment, numbers are capped at 25. 
 
 Religion behind the Iron Curtain
  
  This class will explore Church-State relations, together with the dilemmas faced by ordinary Christians and Communists, in a number of ‘satellite’ countries of East-Central Europe during half a century of Cold War.   Seminar topics will include: 
   
   the show trial of so-called ‘Vatican agents’ in Prague and Bratislava 
   a ‘miracle’ faked by the Secret Police 
   the case of a cardinal who took refuge in the US Embassy in Budapest 
   the election of a Polish Pope and the spirituality of the Polish Solidarity movement. 
   You should take this class if you want to engage imaginatively with both Communist and Catholic perspectives of the post-war period, read independently from a wide variety of primary sources and participate fully in seminar discussion and debate. 
 
 Disability in Modern Britain
  
  The aim of this class is for to gain an understanding of the key role that disability plays in the study of the historical past. 
  The class will explore the ways in which disability has been defined, treated and experienced. It will place developments in disability policy within wider social, cultural and political contexts. Students will engage with, and think critically about, primary sources ranging from official papers, newspaper articles, and oral testimonies, in addition to relevant secondary source material. 
  The use of oral testimonies in particular will help students to consider the lived experiences of disabled people and the ways in which society sought to define and treat disability.   
 
 Medicine & Warfare
  
  This class explores the role that health and medicine has played in the major wars of the twentieth century. In particular, it considers the vital contribution that medicine has made to manpower economy, discipline and morale. 
  Focusing predominantly on Britain, the USA and Europe, the class analyses the ways that different countries have responded to the medical issues posed by modern warfare in both military and civilian contexts. As such, it considers issues such as wartime disability, welfare provision, occupational health and psychiatry, and explores the role that military doctors, women and humanitarian organisations have played in shaping medical responses to war. 
  The key objective of this class is to place military-medical developments within their wider social, cultural and political contexts and to examine the impact of military health and medicine on the lived experience of war. 
 
 France at War
  
  The class begins with the traumatic episodes of the Franco-Prussian War and the Communes of 1871. By analysing the often problematic political and cultural consolidation of the Third Republic, this class will explore the ‘culture wars’ and the internal divisions that culminated in the Dreyfus Affair. After the humiliation of losing its status as Europe’s dominant power, France sought greatness in colonial expansion in Africa and Indochina, while seeking to consolidate national identity by transforming ‘peasants into Frenchmen’. 
  You'll explore the experiences of the First World War, assessing the strength of French unity in the face of the German enemy. The interwar clashes between fascism and the Popular Front will then be examined and how the First World War impacted upon French foreign policy and attitudes towards future war. 
  You'll spend three weeks exploring the enduring controversies of the Second World War, focusing upon the collapse, resistance, collaboration, and French involvement in the persecution of the Jews, as France faced its ‘hereditary enemy’ once again. 
  The class concludes with an analysis of the French withdrawal from Indochina and Algeria and an assessment of France’s position in the post-war global order. 
  A variety of sources will be explored throughout the class, including paintings, monuments, films, literary sources, newspaper reports, memoirs and archival documents.   
 
 Propaganda & War in the Twentieth Century
  
  This class examines means by which states conduct informal activities to promote their domestic and foreign objectives during wartime. In particular, it analyses the role of propaganda throughout the twentieth century, focusing on the use of modern mass communication and technology by states involved in conflicts. 
  The class is structured around a number of historical themes, which help shed light on the emergence of propaganda as an important means of modern warfare. Key themes analysed throughout the course include: 
   
   the First World War as the first ‘total war’ 
   the growth of international radio broadcasting 
   the creation of centralised propaganda machines in Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union 
   home-front propaganda during the Second World War 
   propaganda, disinformation and the Cold War 
   the United States and the experience of Vietnam 
   information, media coverage and the Gulf War 
   9/11 and the war on terrorism 
   During seminars, students will be exposed to relevant primary source material. Particular attention will be given to understanding the theory and practice of propaganda and analysing how technological developments have contributed to shaping modern information and mass persuasion.
   
 
 Historiography
  
  This class is compulsory for students who want to study history at Honours level.﻿ 
  This class will introduce students to the methods used by historians to reconstruct the past, exploring and analysing the techniques used by historians in doing primary research. The class is designed to demonstrate how students can use these techniques in their own work, particularly their 4th year/Honours dissertation. 
  Among the topics that will be covered are: 
   
   constructing bibliographies 
   using evidence 
   using academic conventions 
   constructing research plans 
   writing historical prose 
   The class will also introduce students to the subject of historiography – the history of history – and the ways in which our understanding and construction of history has evolved. The class is designed to promote independent learning and encourage students to reflect more deeply on the subject matter. 
 
 Communism in Practice: the Case of Czechoslovakia
  
  Czechoslovakia, the last post-war European country to fall behind the Iron Curtain, was exceptional in allying itself to the Soviet Union voluntarily and in bringing its own Communists to power more or less democratically. Confident at first that it would be able to pursue its own path to socialism, the Czechoslovak Communist Party soon became one of the most rigidly Stalinist of all the Soviet satellites. The same Party which, in the 1950s, held some of the most notorious show-trials and put up the largest statue of Stalin to be found anywhere in the world, became, in the 1960s, the author of 'Socialism with a Human Face', a package of attempted economic and political reforms explosive enough to end in the country’s invasion by most of its Warsaw Pact allies. 
  This class will seek to move beyond the stereotypes and oversimplifications of Communism passed down by Cold War rhetoric to explore the shifting nature of Communist thought, power politics and international relations in this most perplexing of times in the history of Central Europe. 
 
 Genocide in the 20th Century
  
  The objectives of this class include introducing students to recent examples of genocide and related mass atrocities, and writing and thinking about these cases in a critical and engaged manner through analysis of primary and secondary materials. 
  Students will be introduced to historical, sociological, anthropological, and legal perspectives related to the occurrence of genocide and related atrocity crimes. Using case studies from the 20th century, we'll discuss: 
   
   contemporary issues related to the labelling of cases 
   the evolution of international legal, diplomatic, economic and military measures to prevent, interdict and punish atrocity crimes 
   the phenomenon of genocide denial 
   the politics of commemoration 
   the lingering legacies of violence on individuals and communities in the post-genocide period 
   
  Case studies will include clear-cut (recognized in international humanitarian law) examples of genocide, including: 
   
   the Armenian genocide 
   the Holocaust in Nazi-occupied Europe 
   the 1994 Rwandan genocide 
   
  Less clear-cut examples will also be looked at, such as: 
   
   Canada’s Residential School System 
   Stalinist crimes in Soviet Russia 
   Khmer Rouge atrocities in Cambodia 
   the scorched earth policies in Guatemala 
   ethnic cleansing surrounding the Bosnian War. 
   
 
 Society and Politics in Colonial India: 1880s-1947
  
  This class will cover the political developments and social groups from the late-nineteenth century till the decolonisation of South Asia in 1947. 
  This is a key period in the social and political history of modern South Asia as it witnessed the growth of a mass-based anti-colonial struggle.   Simultaneously, the involvement of different social groups in this process led to the emergence of community and caste based identity politics.   Under pressure from demands for independence, the colonial state initiated a process of phased devolution of power, and decolonisation after the Second World War.   The class will compare these developments to raise questions about the 'modernity' of colonial society and polity.   The class will analyse how different social groups - such as the peasantry, the working class and tribal groups - participated in and shaped political movements in South Asia. 
  Students will also be encouraged to use the regional perspective of South Asian history to understand the different expressions of class, gender and ethnicity in non-Western societies. 
 
 Scotland’s Highland Problem
  
  Historiography had tended to isolate Highland history from Scottish political development during the late medieval and early modern periods.   This class will re-address this trend, emphasising the Highlands as an integral part of Scottish society, at the same time exploring the division within Scotland between the ‘barbaric’ Highlands and the ‘civil’ Lowlands. 
  Students will study the nature and structure of clan society and place Highland events within the wider context of national and British politics during the sixteenth century.   While relations between the Scottish crown and its Highland subjects is the key theme of this class, students will analyse the extent to which such relations changed through time, and why. 
  The class will also highlight divergent policies within clan society itself, a factor which warns against treating the Highlands as a homogenous whole, instead taking into consideration regional, local and personal biases.    
 
 Scottish Society since 1914
  
  The class provides a broad survey of Scottish social history since 1914. The aim of this class is to explore the nature and development of Scottish society in the twentieth century by assessing the impact of industrialisation and the problems associated with de-industrialisation, as well as the development of an urban society. 
  By the end, the successful student should have expanded their knowledge of contemporary Scottish history and have a good idea of the diversity of issues, techniques and arguments which historians have deployed in the study of twentieth-century Scotland. Among the themes to be covered are: 
   
   the extent to which Scotland had a recognisable culture and identity 
   the myths and realities of 'Red Clydeside' 
   the notion that Scotland was a more intensely patriarchal society than the rest of Britain 
   the idea that Scotland was an anti-immigrant, racist and religiously intolerant society 
   
  
 Spanish 
 Spanish 3A
  
  This course builds on and develops the knowledge acquired in Spanish 2B and will consolidate the students’ knowledge and use of the Spanish language within an appropriate cultural context in order to enable the student to live, study and work in a Spanish-speaking country. This course aims to bring you up to level B2 of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. 
 
 Spanish 3B
 
   This course aims to build on and develop the knowledge acquired in Spanish 3A and will focus on two relevant topics which includes the preparation for the year abroad. This course aims to bring you up to level B2+ of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. In addition to the final exam, a comprehensive project will comprise the other 50% of your final mark for this course. This project will enable you to put into practice and further develop the linguistic skills and cultural knowledge you have developed since you started studying Spanish at Strathclyde. 
 
 Spanish and Latin American Studies III
  
  This course builds on and develops the knowledge acquired in Independence and isolation in Spain and Latin America - Hispanic Studies 2 (R4200), and adds a dimension of critical and theoretical awareness, as well as developing critical skills through a study of individual texts and films from Spain and different countries of Latin America, to build an understanding of the history and cultures in which they were produced. 
 
 Year abroad 
 Year abroad
  
  Honours students spend a year abroad after Year 3, usually working as an English teaching assistant, gaining work experience in a professional environment or studying at a foreign institution. Students studying two languages may opt to spend third year in one country and a further year in the country of their other language, before returning to Strathclyde for Honours year.﻿ 
 
 Year 4 
 History 
 Compulsory classes
 Special subject classes (taught over both Semesters 1 & 2)
 The Scramble for the Middle East: Arab Nationalism, Zionism and European Colonial Powers, 1914-1939 
  
  The interwar years are central to any analysis of the decline of European colonial rule in the Middle East and the formation of nation states. It was in the 1920s and 1930s that British and French mandatory authorities faced the emergence of nationalist movements throughout the Arab world as well as the increasing competition and penetration of hostile forces. 
  Students will examine historical themes and events that are significant to the development of political and cultural identities in the Middle East. Through the analysis of primary sources, students will focus on: 
   
   the debate surrounding British and French colonial practices 
   the emergence of the Zionist movement and the creation of a Jewish home in Palestine 
   the radicalisation of Arab nationalism and its impact upon the relations between local political elites and European colonial powers 
   the increasing tension between Jewish and Arab communities in Palestine 
   the creation of the mandates in Palestine, Transjordan, Syria and Lebanon and the process that led to the independence of Egypt and Iraq 
   the challenge brought by German and Italian subversive activities to British and French strategic interests in the region 
   
 
 Twentieth-Century Czechoslovakia
  
  The class will explore major themes in twentieth-century European history: 
   
   the post-World War I settlement 
   the rise of fascism 
   the origins and course of the Second World War, Soviet expansion, the Cold War, the social and political revolutions of the 1960s and the waning of the Soviet Union in the 1980s and 1990s -- from the perspective of a central European country which was created in 1918, dissolved in 1993, and whose opinions were seldom taken into account by the Great Powers. 
   
  Students will obtain a solid grounding in the history of Czechoslovakia from its creation to its dissolution. The class should also offer a useful introduction to themes in twentieth-century European history more generally. 
  Independent reading will concentrate heavily on source material, enabling students to taste the excitement as well as the frustrations of historical research. By being encouraged to view European affairs from a Czech perspective while at the same time having special responsibility for one other European country, students will be led to consider the problems of historical bias and subjectivity, and should develop historical empathy as well as considerable sensitivity to the complexity of international affairs. 
 
 Rwanda: Peace, Conflict & the Politics
  
  The purpose of this special subject is to introduce students to the study of peace and conflict, broadly defined, and to encourage them to write and think about these subjects in a critical and engaged manner informed first and foremost by history-based discourse, but also borrowing from political science, anthropology, and related disciplines. 
  The module will focus on the case study of Rwanda, with individual classes proceeding chronologically. 
  The first semester will cover the pre-colonial period to the start of the second Hutu Republic in 1973, while the second semester will cover 1973 to present. 
  Throughout, students will analyse relevant primary and secondary sources to explore the benefits of applying a historical lens to understanding a nation whose recent history includes both periods of peace and political stability, and several manifestations of state-sanctioned violence, including colonialism, small-scale ethnic, regional, and political conflicts, civil war, genocide, and authoritarianism. 
  Students seeking careers in human rights advocacy, international law, diplomacy, and journalism will also find this course particularly relevant. 
 
 Plantation in Ulster
  
  This class will explore the plantations that took place in Ulster during the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. 
  Students will examine the emergence of the idea for plantation in Ireland, why Ulster was regarded as suitable for plantation, and the various endeavours by English and Scots to settle in the north of Ireland, whether by private enterprise or by the state. This will culminate in the official Plantation of Ulster, a 'British' project initiated by James VI and I in the early years of his reign as king of England, Ireland and Scotland. 
  Students will also look at a couple of cases studies of individuals who were involved in plantation, enabling a detailed study of the political, social, economic and confessional reasons why they chose to migrate to and settle in Ireland at this time. 
  
 Elective classes
 France at War, 1870-1962
  
  The class begins with the traumatic episodes of the Franco-Prussian War and the Communes of 1871. By analysing the often problematic political and cultural consolidation of the Third Republic, this class will explore the ‘culture wars’ and the internal divisions that culminated in the Dreyfus Affair. After the humiliation of losing its status as Europe’s dominant power, France sought greatness in colonial expansion in Africa and Indochina, while seeking to consolidate national identity by transforming ‘peasants into Frenchmen’. 
  You'll explore the experiences of the First World War, assessing the strength of French unity in the face of the German enemy. The interwar clashes between fascism and the Popular Front will then be examined and how the First World War impacted upon French foreign policy and attitudes towards future war. 
  You'll spend three weeks exploring the enduring controversies of the Second World War, focusing upon the collapse, resistance, collaboration, and French involvement in the persecution of the Jews, as France faced its ‘hereditary enemy’ once again. 
  The class concludes with an analysis of the French withdrawal from Indochina and Algeria and an assessment of France’s position in the post-war global order. 
  A variety of sources will be explored throughout the class, including paintings, monuments, films, literary sources, newspaper reports, memoirs and archival documents. 
 
 Medicine & Warfare in the Twentieth Century
  
  This class explores the role that health and medicine has played in the major wars of the twentieth century. In particular, it considers the vital contribution that medicine has made to manpower economy, discipline and morale. 
  Focusing predominantly on Britain, the USA and Europe, the class analyses the ways that different countries have responded to the medical issues posed by modern warfare in both military and civilian contexts. As such, it considers issues such as wartime disability, welfare provision, occupational health and psychiatry, and explores the role that military doctors, women and humanitarian organisations have played in shaping medical responses to war. 
  The key objective of this class is to place military-medical developments within their wider social, cultural and political contexts and to examine the impact of military health and medicine on the lived experience of war. 
 
 Religion behind the Iron Curtain
  
  This class will explore Church-State relations, together with the dilemmas faced by ordinary Christians and Communists, in a number of ‘satellite’ countries of East-Central Europe during half a century of Cold War.   Seminar topics will include: 
   
   the show trial of so-called ‘Vatican agents’ in Prague and Bratislava 
   a ‘miracle’ faked by the Secret Police 
   the case of a cardinal who took refuge in the US Embassy in Budapest 
   the election of a Polish Pope and the spirituality of the Polish Solidarity movement. 
   You should take this class if you want to engage imaginatively with both Communist and Catholic perspectives of the post-war period, read independently from a wide variety of primary sources and participate fully in seminar discussion and debate. 
 
 Scottish Society
  
  The class provides a broad survey of Scottish social history since 1914. 
  The aim of this class is to explore the nature and development of Scottish society (and place it in a wider context) and to examine dominant narratives of Scotland and Scots in the twentieth century. 
  By the end, the successful student should have expanded their knowledge of contemporary Scottish history and have a good idea of the diversity of issues, methodologies and arguments which historians have deployed in the study of twentieth-century Scotland.   Among the themes to be covered are: 
   
   gender relations (for example, analysis of the Scottish ‘hard man’ narrative) 
   religion (including sectarianism and secularisation) 
   health and deprivation 
   the arts and culture (including festivals, theatre, cinema and television) 
   industry (and de-industrialisation and its impacts) 
   Overall, this class will explore the extent to which Scotland had a recognisable national culture and identity and assess and deconstruct narratives of Scottish society since 1914. 
 
 Scotland’s Highland Problem
  
  Historiography had tended to isolate Highland history from Scottish political development during the late medieval and early modern periods.   This class will re-address this trend, emphasising the Highlands as an integral part of Scottish society, at the same time exploring the division within Scotland between the ‘barbaric’ Highlands and the ‘civil’ Lowlands. 
  Students will study the nature and structure of clan society and place Highland events within the wider context of national and British politics during the sixteenth century.   While relations between the Scottish crown and its Highland subjects is the key theme of this class, students will analyse the extent to which such relations changed through time, and why. 
  The class will also highlight divergent policies within clan society itself, a factor which warns against treating the Highlands as a homogenous whole, instead taking into consideration regional, local and personal biases.    
 
 Communism in Practice: the Case of Czechoslovakia
  
  Czechoslovakia, the last post-war European country to fall behind the Iron Curtain, was exceptional in allying itself to the Soviet Union voluntarily and in bringing its own Communists to power more or less democratically. Confident at first that it would be able to pursue its own path to socialism, the Czechoslovak Communist Party soon became one of the most rigidly Stalinist of all the Soviet satellites. The same Party which, in the 1950s, held some of the most notorious show-trials and put up the largest statue of Stalin to be found anywhere in the world, became, in the 1960s, the author of 'Socialism with a Human Face', a package of attempted economic and political reforms explosive enough to end in the country’s invasion by most of its Warsaw Pact allies. 
  This class will seek to move beyond the stereotypes and oversimplifications of Communism passed down by Cold War rhetoric to explore the shifting nature of Communist thought, power politics and international relations in this most perplexing of times in the history of Central Europe. 
 
 Genocide in the 20th Century
  
  The objectives of this class include introducing students to recent examples of genocide and related mass atrocities, and writing and thinking about these cases in a critical and engaged manner through analysis of primary and secondary materials. 
  Students will be introduced to historical, sociological, anthropological, and legal perspectives related to the occurrence of genocide and related atrocity crimes. Using case studies from the 20th century, we'll discuss: 
   
   contemporary issues related to the labelling of cases 
   the evolution of international legal, diplomatic, economic and military measures to prevent, interdict and punish atrocity crimes 
   the phenomenon of genocide denial 
   the politics of commemoration 
   the lingering legacies of violence on individuals and communities in the post-genocide period 
   
  Case studies will include clear-cut (recognized in international humanitarian law) examples of genocide, including: 
   
   the Armenian genocide 
   the Holocaust in Nazi-occupied Europe 
   the 1994 Rwandan genocide 
   
  Less clear-cut examples will also be looked at, such as: 
   
   Canada’s Residential School System 
   Stalinist crimes in Soviet Russia 
   Khmer Rouge atrocities in Cambodia 
   the scorched earth policies in Guatemala 
   ethnic cleansing surrounding the Bosnian War. 
   
 
 Society & Politics in Colonial India
  
  This class will cover the political developments and social groups from the late-nineteenth century till the decolonisation of South Asia in 1947. 
  This is a key period in the social and political history of modern South Asia as it witnessed the growth of a mass-based anti-colonial struggle.   Simultaneously, the involvement of different social groups in this process led to the emergence of community and caste based identity politics.   Under pressure from demands for independence, the colonial state initiated a process of phased devolution of power, and decolonisation after the Second World War.   The class will compare these developments to raise questions about the 'modernity' of colonial society and polity.   The class will analyse how different social groups - such as the peasantry, the working class and tribal groups - participated in and shaped political movements in South Asia. 
  Students will also be encouraged to use the regional perspective of South Asian history to understand the different expressions of class, gender and ethnicity in non-Western societies. 
  
 Spanish 
 Compulsory classes
 Spanish Honours Language 4
  
  There are three strands in the Spanish 4 Language programme, which are closely integrated with each other: Language A (writing in Spanish), Language B (analysis and translation into English of Spanish texts), and Language C (oral presentation and interpreting). The programme will enable students to function in the target language at a sufficiently high level of ability, both spoken and written, to be accepted as a fully competent member of the target language community, and effectively to discharge a professional role within and/or in relation to that community. 
 
 The Latin American Short Story 
  
  This course builds on and develops the knowledge on Latin American literature and culture acquired in Spanish and Latin American Studies II and III; and adds a dimension of theoretical analysis, as well as developing critical skills through a study of texts from the different countries of Latin America. 
 
 Shaping Spain: Ideas, Beliefs and Identity
  
  Rooted in the Spanish History of Ideas, this course explores the condition and motivations for the development of some of the existing main currents of thought in Spain since 1989. It encourages a critical understanding of Spanish history and contextualises the work of several Spanish seminal thinkers (Unamuno, Ortega, Aza&ntilde;a, Zambrano) and it explores their thought in relation to the key themes of the course: ideas, beliefs, and identity. 
 
 Hispanic Studies 4
  
  This is a level four Honours class designed to build on the knowledge of Hispanic cultural studies acquired in Spanish and Latin American Studies 1A, II and III. The purpose of this class is to explore contemporary issues in Hispanic cultures. Class content will reflect the research specialisms of staff in Spanish and the actual texts and films studies may vary from year to year to reflect student demand and staff availability, as determined by the research focus of the subject. Each year, the class will focus on specific aspects of Hispanic history, politics, society and/or cultures. For example, possible class titles are: Gender and Sexuality in the Hispanic world; The Politics of the Fantastic in Hispanic Fiction and Film; Dictatorship and Resistance in Hispanic Cinema. 
  
 