Course content 
 Year 1 
 English 
 Year 1
  
  In this wide-ranging introduction to university-level English, your required reading ranges from ancient tales, to Shakespearean drama, to cutting-edge contemporary fiction. 
  
 Education 
 Understanding Education in the 21st Century
  
  This class introduces students to a large and rich seam of disciplinary knowledge. It is an introductory class of potential interest to all who want to understand more about Education. Some of the key content to be addressed in the module is around the following: 
   
   the field of study that is education: what it is and how we know that 
   the context of education: some contribution of political, historical and economic dimensions to curriculum, schooling, policy, globalisation 
   education achievement: some contributions of psychological, sociological and philosophical perspectives to topics such as learning, diversity, gender 
   
 
 Placement & Curriculum
  
  On this module, students from across disciplines work together to learn  about  children and the  communities in which they live; children's health and wellbeing; child protection; children's voice;  children's play and  play places. The notion  that the  health and wellbeing of children and young people is central to the advancement of society is a seminal theme in this module.   
  The placement experience has been designed to allow students to undertake a work placement with children and young people from 0 - 14 years.   Placements  will be  provided  in a range of settings outwith the mainstream classroom. 
 
 Year 2 
 English 
 Year 2
  
  You'll study momentous events in literary history in the historical core classes on Renaissance, Enlightenment and Romantic writing. You'll also learn about the various ways in which philosophers, historians and authors have tried to analyse literature in a course on Literature, Criticism and Theory. 
  
 Education 
 Learners & Learning
 
   This class provides students with an essential understanding of human learning processes and the needs of learners across the life-course. 
 
 Informal Education
 
   This module investigates philosophical and pedagogical interventions beyond the school curriculum in informal settings, with adults in particular. It'll also open up possibilities for informal education techniques and practices to be considered and adopted by a range of professions and to explore potential partnerships between informal education specialists and others. 
 
 Year 3 
 English 
 Year 3
  
  You'll continue with historical core classes on Victorian and 20th-century Literature, and you'll also choose one further class (English with another subject) or three classes (single English). Our extensive menu of options means you could study anything from Shakespeare to experimental fiction, from children’s literature to America in the 1920s, from autobiography to the Glasgow novel, from First World War literature to detective fiction. 
  
 Education 
 History & Philosophy of Education
  
  This module will support students in developing their knowledge and understanding of the roots of some key educational ideas in history. These will be considered from a philosophical perspective. 
 
 Children & Childhood
  
  This module will focus on children and childhood in contexts other than formal education settings that will be explored elsewhere. The aim of this module is to introduce students to the concepts of child and childhood through a range representations. The class will draw on children in film, art and literature to explore representations of children and childhood and experiences of childhood. 
 
 Social Pedagogy with Adults
  
  This module is based on an understanding of the evolution of adult learning and the resultant principles that underline current practice and will illustrate how adult educators work and will also open up possibilities for adult education techniques and practices to be considered. It'll also explore potential partnerships between adult educators and others. 
 
 Year 4 
 English 
 Year 4
  
  Throughout the degree, analytical and writing skills are being developed, preparing you to tackle the final-year dissertation. The choice of subjects for your dissertation is wide open – we value student initiative and reward it when we see it. 
  Fourth year is also your chance to take some more options – two for Joint Honours and three for Single Honours. The options on offer in Honours year include classes on Victorian Gothic writing, literary snobbery, 1930s literature and culture, travel writing, atrocity and modernism, oral narratives and fairytales. 
  
 Education 
 Compulsory classes
 Dissertation
  
  The Dissertation in Education is designed to further students’ development of a questioning, self-evaluative and reflective approach in a major in-depth piece of work demanding independent, self-motivated study and the sustained application of professional research and enquiry skills. 
  The widest possible range of topics, types of project, modes of enquiry and of research techniques is encouraged. What projects have in common is the individual student’s ownership and control of the project and the expectation of high quality work. 
  
 Elective classes
 Choose from this list
 Policy & Politics in Education
  
  This class will provide students with the opportunity to engage in debate about current issues in education through detailed exploration of the policy and political contexts. It will introduce students to frameworks for understanding how policy comes about and how it is inextricably linked with political issues. 
 
 Social Issues in Education
  
  This class will teach students about the responsibility of teachers for the education, health and well-being of all children, in the context of a complex and diverse society.   It will also address the needs of those who will work with children, young people and adults in a variety of education-related contexts through its focus on a range of key social issues and the relevant national legislative and policy framework. 
 
 Social Research Methods
  
  This class prepares you for designing and completing a research project. It will equip you with the skills and knowledge required in planning and delivering a research project. 
  
 