Course content 
 Years 1 and 2 there's strong emphasis on practical laboratory skills and the development of generic skills such as scientific writing and problem-solving. 
 In Years 3 and 4 you'll take specialist classes in microbiology and one other subject chosen from immunology or biochemistry. You'll also undertake a substantial research project in Year 4 and present a dissertation of the work. 
 In Year 5, you'll complete a substantial laboratory-based research project and write a thesis based on your experimental data. You'll also study advanced research methods and critical analysis of scientific papers in microbiology. 
 Year 1
 
 All full-time students will undertake all compulsory classes and one elective class.
  
 Compulsory classes 
 Foundation Bioscience & Statistics
  
  The aims of this class include: 
   
   introducing the process of scientific discovery through the analysis and retrieval and evaluation of information using appropriate search engines, and the synthesis of new ideas 
   developing a range of writing and presentation skills, which will benefit you, not only throughout University, but also in your future career 
   giving you an understanding of basic skills in statistical analysis of data 
   
 
 Molecular Bioscience
  
  This class will familiarise you with the basic knowledge and concepts of cell structure and function. You'll also be introduced to the basic concepts underlying classical and molecular genetics, including techniques that form the basis for the study of molecular biology. 
 
 Biology of Organisms
  
  The aims of this class include: 
   
   introducing you to the biology of microbes, plants and animals 
   introducing you ﻿to physiological systems 
   
 
 Practical Bioscience & Skills Development 1
  
  This class will introduce you to laboratory-based practical bioscience. You'll be enabled to analyse your personal and key skills and plan your development. 
 
 Chemistry for Bioscience
 
   To provide you with fundamental concepts of general chemistry. 
 
 Year 2 
 Compulsory classes 
 Introduction to Infection & Immunity
  
  This class will provide you with an introduction to the diversity of infectious agents and how the immune response of the mammalian host attempts to clear infection. 
  Lectures will cover aspects of bacterial, parasitic, viral and fungal infections, describing pathogens, the diseases they cause and mechanisms of control. Lectures will also describe many of the key components of the immune system, before examining how these factors play a role in mediating defence against different infections. 
 
 Nutritional Biochemistry & Metabolism
  
  The aims of this class are to: 
   
   To demonstrate the general principles of the design of metabolism, the way in which major pathways are integrated and regulated through signal transduction and the role of metabolism in nutrition 
   To provide a biochemical basis for understanding inborn errors of metabolism and metabolism in disease states   
   To demonstrate the role of enzymes in controlling metabolic pathways 
   
 
 Cell & Molecular Biology
  
  The aims of this class are: 
   
   To demonstrate the role of genetic analysis in the elucidation of the mechanisms of gene function 
   To provide an introduction to cytology and histology 
   To develop a deeper understanding of cellular compartments and structures and their functions   
   
 
 Practical Bioscience & Skills Development 2
  
  The aims of this class are: 
   
   To develop skills for laboratory work in Biomedical Sciences 
   To reinforce understanding of key principles of core subjects taught in 2nd year 
   To enable you to analyse your personal and key skills and plan your development 
   To introduce you to the type of analytic methods used in the different degree disciplines ie Biomedical Science, Biochemistry, Forensic Biology, Immunology, Microbiology and Pharmacology 
   
 
 Human Physiology
  
  This class will provide you with a working knowledge of normal human physiology in preparation for the study of human diseases and the uses of drugs in their treatment. 
 
 Bio-organic Chemistry
  
 
 Year 3
 
 All full-time students shall undertake the following compulsory classes along with a choice of elective classes.
  
 Compulsory classes 
 Laboratory Methods & Skills Development
  
  This class will  familiarise you with the current laboratory methods utilised in biomedical science research by attending laboratory sessions intended to provide a wide range of generic skills expected of laboratory science. 
  You'll also be trained in data collation and presentation and be able to write reports in a coherent and scientific manner. It's also intended that you'll gain an understanding of the underlying design of experimental studies.   
 
 Fundamental Microbiology
  
  The key aims of the class are: 
   
   to provide you with a sound knowledge and understanding of microbial biochemistry, growth and function that underpins classification, survival and virulence 
   to provide a comprehensive knowledge of the pathogenicity mechanisms of viruses, bacteria and fungi, and factors which influence their spread 
   
 
 Intermediate Microbiology
  
  The course is managed via two themes: 
   
   microbial ecology and environmental microbiology 
   food microbiology and exploiting microbes   
   
 
 Year 4
 
 All full-time students shall undertake the following compulsory classes along with a choice of elective classes.
  
 Compulsory classes 
 Research in Biomedical Sciences
  
  The aims of this class are: 
   
   to provide training in skills required for carrying out a research project 
   to develop an awareness of ethical issues in biomedical research 
   to develop higher order cognitive abilities of analysis, synthesis and evaluation 
   to develop personal skills 
   
 
 Honours Microbiology 1
  
  The aims of this class are: 
   
   to provide students with a sound knowledge and understanding of the mechanisms by which bacteria regulate their cellular activity and cause disease 
   to provide a comprehensive knowledge of the procedures by which microbial infection can be contained and controlled 
   to present and analyse advanced information on both topics 
   
 
 Honours Microbiology 2
  
  This course operates in two strands: 
   
   paper interpretation 
   modern industrial microbiology 
   
  The aims of the paper interpretation strand are: 
   
   to understand the construction, reading and interpretation of research papers 
   to critically examine state-of-the-art microbiological literature 
   to  enhance presentation skills 
   to critically assess scientific presentations 
   
  The aims of the modern industrial interpretation strand are: 
   
   to give critical insights into the underpinning technological and microbiological developments in  industrial microbiology 
     to look at the application of modern molecular biology to industrial microbiology 
   to demonstrate how technological challenges in bioprocessing can be overcome successfully 
   
 
 Year 5 
 Compulsory classes 
 Generic Biomedical & Pharmaceutical Research Skills
  
  The aim of the class is to enable you to use information sources, apply statistical methods, appreciate ethical issues and develop personal effectiveness. 
  Class content: 
   
   information & database searching 
   data handling & experimental design 
   ethics in research & medicines regulation 
   personal effectiveness & personal development planning 
   
 
 MSci Microbiology Project & Thesis
  
  The aim of the class is to provide research training in microbiology. 
  You choose a topic, prepare a literature review, develop a hypothesis and plan and execute a research project using appropriate techniques. The findings are written up as a thesis.﻿ 
 
 Research Topics in Microbiology
  
  The aim of this class is to provide you with knowledge and skills to discuss advanced research topics in microbiology. 
  The class will expect you to read and evaluate current research papers in microbiology. You must also attend workshops, where you'll participate in group discussions. You'll prepare a short summary on each paper. You'll also be expected to present at one of the workshops, giving a powerpoint presentation on a specific paper. 
  
 