Course content 
 Year 1 
 Semester 1
 Preparing for Lifelong Learning
  
  This module is designed to equip you with the skills and knowledge required for a proactive approach to learning and study. 
  It aims to help you reflect on your own approaches to learning, understand the role of academic enquiry and research within this. 
  You'll consider how perceptions of learning arise and how they influence the process and outcome of learning. 
 
 Understanding Social Science & Social Research 
  
  This module introduces and explores social science theories and approaches which are relevant to contemporary social work, drawing in particular from sociology and social policy. 
  The module also has an emphasis on research awareness. For example, public discourses around social policy and interpreting research data relating to issues such as poverty and inequality. You're introduced to an appreciation of how research is used in public policy.   
 
 Psychology for Social Work
  
  This module will introduce you to the key socio-psychological theories informing an understanding of human development and behaviour. Areas covered will include individual, group and community factors such as identity, family, disability and culture. 
  You'll develop an understanding of the process of development for individuals and groups. This will include discussion of the key factors in promoting resilience and those which may inhibit healthy growth.   
  
 Semester 2
 Poverty, Disadvantage and Discrimination
 
   This module will contribute to the development of your awareness and understanding of issues of inequality. It will develop some of the theories and concepts from the module "Understanding Social Science and Social Research" and consider how inequality impacts on the lives of vulnerable individuals and groups within society. 
 
 Values, Ethics and Justice
  
  This module provides you with a historical overview of the development of social work values and ethics. It introduces you to core ethical concepts in social work and encourages you to understanding the ethical dimensions of choice, decision-making, interventions and the use of professional discretion. 
  Social work elective including: 
   
   Understanding Domestic Violence and Abuse 
   Crime and Criminology 
   Summer Exchange Programme with University of Greensboro, North Carolina 
   
 
 Year 2 
 Semester 1
 People, Communities and Society
  
  This module will prepare you for work with individuals, families and communities. It will equip you with the skills necessary to develop a critical understanding of the complex interactions between individuals, groups and wider social contexts. 
  The module will assist you to identify the social processes that can result in inequalities within communities and will build on the sociological and psychological theories introduced in year one of the course. The module will consider the ways in which sources of inequality can be challenged at an individual, community and structural level. 
 
 Social Work Organisation and Collaborative Practice
  
  This module examines the delivery models and organisational structures that underpin social work services. A key issue to be addressed will be the extent to which changes in organisation and structures facilitate the role and value base of social work. 
  The module will also take account of the increasing emphasis on inter-professional working across public services. It will examine the evidence base for pursuing inter-professional working and the challenges it poses for the voice and values of social work to be heard amongst other professional disciplines. 
 
 Social Work Processes & Practices
  
  This module is intended to equip you with the practice skills and theory required in order to take Assessed Practice 1. 
  The module will provide you with the opportunity to rehearse skills fundamental to sound and appropriate professional relationships It's the primary means by which you're assessed as competent to undertake practice learning in a service delivery setting. 
  
 Semester 2
 Law for Social Work Practice
  
  The module will provide you with a thorough understanding of the legal basis for social work intervention and the significance of the relationships with statutory social services and the independent social services sector. 
  It will enable you to understand the social worker’s role as statutory agent with duties and responsibilities to protect the public and uphold the law by providing you with a firm grounding in the legislation that underpins and impinges on your practice. 
 
 Social Work in Diverse Contexts
  
  You have the opportunity to choose between three strands: 
   
   residential child care 
   community care 
   criminal justice 
   
  Social workers practise in a diverse range of settings. This module comprises a series of options which enables you to develop a deeper, critical understanding of social work practice in a particular setting. 
 
 Understanding Risk and Protection
  
  The module will offer a range of learning experiences to help you develop skills in assessing and managing risk.   There will be a thorough examination of the concepts of risk and protection. The social and political dimensions of risk and protection will be explored using material contained in public enquiry reports. 
  You'll be required to consider the models and methods of risk assessment and risk management across service user groups. 
 
 Year 3 
 Semester 1
 Assessed Practice 1 
  
  This module is intended to provide you with opportunities to develop skills, values, knowledge and competence in a specified range of key components of social work practice, and to integrate this with learning across all prior modules undertaken on their course.   This will be undertaken in an 80 day placement in a social work agency. 
  
 Semester 2
 Social Work Approaches and Methods
 
   This module seeks to develop your awareness of complex assessment, approaches and methods which you need to meet the requirements of your second and final practice learning opportunity. The learning outcomes and content are closely matched to Standards in Social Work Education. It builds directly on the year two module Social Work Processes and Practice. 
 
 Social Research for Social Work 
  
  This module aims to encourage you to take a reflective approach to research and its links to social work policy and practice and to develop research-mindedness as a requirement of ethical and effective practice. 
  The module will communicate the importance of research in contributing to continuing professional development and will prepare you for undertaking your dissertation in Year 4 of the course. 
 
 Social Work in a Global Context 
  
  The process of globalisation has resulted in an increasing diversity in Scotland’s population. There's a need for social work practice which recognises effectively this diversity and difference and the marked adversity or disadvantage and discrimination faced by some migrants.   
 
 Year 4 
 Semester 1
 Assessed Practice 2
  
  This module is intended to provide students on qualifying courses for social work with opportunities to: 
   
   develop competence in all specified components of social work practice 
   build on development achieved in the module Practice Learning I 
   integrate leaning across all prior modules undertaken on their course 
   
  This will be undertaken in an 80-day placement in a social work agency. 
  
 Semester 2
 Lifelong Learning for Social Work
  
  This module aims to help you establish and strengthen the knowledge, understanding and skills required to engage in professional development at a range of levels after qualification. 
  It aims to provide a focus for you in the process of tracking, recording and reviewing your individual development (a process which began in the module ‘Preparing for Lifelong Learning’ and continued in activities through Years 2 and 3 of the course). The module will allow you to be able to use this process as a basis for individual development planning beyond the degree programme. 
 
 Honours Dissertation
  
  Social workers need analytical and research skills in order to plan, monitor and evaluate professional practice. 
  This module builds on learning in Research for Ethical and Effective Practice by providing you with the opportunity to develop your research competence by undertaking a small scale research project on some aspect of social work for your honours dissertation. 
  
 