Course content 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Economics 
 Introduction to Economics
  
  The purpose of this class is to provide you with a balanced introduction to economics which will be at once self-contained and lay the foundation for further study in economics and more generally. The work of the class will be based on a programme of systematic directed reading, supplemented by tutorials, using group projects and in-class short answer tests as cumulative assessment. 
  
 Psychology 
 Psychology 1a
  
  You'll take this class in semester 1 and are not expected to have any prior knowledge of psychology. It explores learning theory, developmental psychology, personality, biological psychology, and the scientific basis for psychology. 
 
 Psychology 1b
  
  This class is taught in semester 2 and covers sensation and perception, cognitive psychology, social psychology, abnormal psychology, and research methods. 
 
 Year 2 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 2
  
  This is the core microeconomics class in second year. It aims to develop your understanding of: the concepts of consumer choice; the motives of the firm and profit maximisation; the market and its role in achieving equilibrium prices and quantities; and the implications of market power. It will introduce you to mathematical techniques commonplace in economics, giving you the ability to apply these in a wider economic context. 
     
 
 Macroeconomics 2
 
   The class builds upon the macroeconomic foundations established in the first year Economics class and both extends and deepens analysis. In particular this class will develop your ability to use key macroeconomic models and will also provide an introduction to the analysis of economic data. 
  
 Psychology 
 Cognition & Neuropsychology
  
  This class reveals how our understanding of higher mental functions has been enhanced through: 
   
   theoretical and experimental studies of normal human cognition 
   neuropsychological studies of how cognitive functions may be damaged as a result of brain lesions 
   Topics covered include disorders of the perceptual system, memory and attention, and the role of the frontal lobes in planning, motivation, emotion, and personality. 
 
 Social & Health Psychology
  
  This class introduces social psychological theories and research that provide insights into why people believe what they believe, and why they behave the way they do. 
  Topics covered include attribution theory, aggression, prosocial behaviour, group influence, norms, conformity, obedience, and attitudes. 
  It ends with an introduction to health psychology, demonstrating how social psychological principles covered earlier in the class are applied to pressing, real-world health issues such as dietary behaviour, smoking/alcohol-use, and suicide. 
 
 Introduction to Research Design & Analysis
  
  You'll be introduced to the main features of measurement, research design, and statistical analysis in psychology. 
  Following a general introduction, the course presents fundamental concepts, issues, and debates in the field of research methods. 
  You'll also become familiarised with the conceptual basis for inferential statistical testing, and introduced to different inferential statistics. Finally, a brief introduction to qualitative research methods takes place. 
 
 Introduction to Research Design & Analysis
  
  You'll be introduced to the main features of measurement, research design, and statistical analysis in psychology. 
  Following a general introduction, the course presents fundamental concepts, issues, and debates in the field of research methods. 
  You'll also become familiarised with the conceptual basis for inferential statistical testing, and introduced to different inferential statistics. Finally, a brief introduction to qualitative research methods takes place. 
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 3
  
  Adam Smith's hidden hand - markets result in efficient outcomes - doesn't always work. We seek to understand why through the study of market power, externalities and public goods, and then go on to apply these ideas to issues of education, healthcare provision and crime and punishment. 
 
 Macroeconomics 3
 
   This class builds on the Macroeconomics you studied in second year by covering four topics in detail: (i) models of economic growth; (ii) the effects of macroeconomic policy in an open economy; (iii) the interrelationships between money growth, output, unemployment and inflation; and (iv) the implications of high government debt. 
  
 Psychology 
 Research Methods in Psychology
  
  This class builds on year 2 and equips you with a broader, more advanced set of methodological and analytic skills. These skills are essential for carrying out the year 4 dissertation and for being able to read and understand articles published in academic journals. 
 
 Individual Differences
  
  You're encouraged to think scientifically about conceptual and practical issues related to the study of individual differences, with specific reference to intelligence and personality. You'll gain the chance to put this knowledge into practice by designing your own measurement instrument. 
 
 Cognition
  
  You'll be introduced to some of the core topics in cognitive psychology 
   
   Perception and action, particularly how we perceive time and recognise faces 
   Memory and learning, including models of episodic and working memory 
   Language,  including word production, sentence comprehension, and discourse processing 
   Thinking,  specifically problem solving, deductive reasoning and judgement and decision making. 
   
 
 Development
  
  This class reviews the ways that children develop from infancy right through to the end of adolescence. Key theories are presented and used to explore the extent to which children’s development is continuous or stage-like and whether specific skills develop more quickly than others. Issues relating to infancy, ‘theory of mind’ (understanding others’ thoughts and beliefs), executive function (planning and monitoring abilities), language, and communication form the core themes in the class. 
 
 Social Psychology
  
  This class allows you to consider current ideas and positions within social psychology. Four themes drive the class 
   
   Attitudes and attitude change, covering the Theory of Planned Behaviour and the Health Belief Model 
   Identity, with a focus on social, personal and group identities 
   Prejudice, connecting both attitudes and identities, and covering a broad range of areas such as social representations, stereotyping, prejudice and conflict 
   Epistemology, where consideration is given to the theory of knowledge, how social psychological knowledge is produced, and to what effect 
   
 
 Psychobiology
  
  The purpose of this class is to provide the opportunity for you to learn the basic principles of brain function, and to encourage you to address the implications of this understanding for their own view of how behaviour is generated. It includes coverage of electrophysiology and psychopharmacology, neuroanatomy, research methods in neuroscience. There are focused sections relating to the visual system and the motor system. 
 
 Year 4 
 Economics 
 Dissertation 
 
   The dissertation is an important part of the fourth year programme. Single Honours Economics BA students are required to submit a dissertation in Economics while Joint Honours BA students may submit a dissertation in Economics or in their other Honours subject. 
  
 Elective classes
 Microeconomics 4
  
  Game Theory and  Information Economics, the topics of this class, consider market failure  resulting from two different sources: individuals pursuing their own  self-interest at the  expense of others; and information asymmetry which alters  the way agents behave.  Methods to alleviate these market failures will also be  considered. 
 
 Macroeconomics 4
  
  This class aims to provide you with the required tools to understand current macroeconomic issues, such as the interactions between the banking sector and monetary policy or the policy responses to the global financial crisis.    Throughout the class, the analytical usefulness of the theoretical models taught is illustrated with real-world examples. 
 
 Introduction to Econometrics
  
  This class builds upon the empirical content of Macroeconomics 2 and further develops your ability to analyse economic data. In addition, this class lays the foundations for further study of econometrics at Honours level. 
 
 Economics of Firms & Industries 
  
  This class introduces you to different industry structures and studies the behaviour of firms within those structures.   The material builds on the study of the theory of the firm presented in Microeconomics 2 and provides a foundation for the study of industrial organisation at Honours level. 
 
 Industrial Economics
 
   This course investigates the actions that firms in an industry might take to preserve their profit in that industry, and the implications that this has for competition policy and regulation. We take an analytical approach to the issues which will be supported by examining case studies and current events. 
 
 Applied Econometrics
  
  In the third year econometrics class you’ll have learned about regression in both a cross-sectional data and time series data context. This class extends that knowledge in three ways. 
  First, for cross-sectional data, the class deals with regression techniques where the dependent variable may be restricted or limited in some way. In such cases, the regression model as taught in the third year class is not appropriate; this class develops models which are similar in spirit to the standard regression model, but can handle all of these cases. 
  A second purpose of Applied Econometrics is to develop regression methods which can be used when you have panel data - consisting of both cross-sectional and time-series dimensions. 
  Third, the class will build on the introduction to the econometrics of time series data developed in this class by developing two classes of models. 
 
 Financial Development & Economic Growth
  
  This class gives a balanced view of the role of finance in promoting long-run economic growth, but also booms and busts. The nature and role of financial intermediaries will be introduced, and, afterwards, formally addressed in a simple aggregate growth model. Empirical evidence will be examined, before turning to the specificities of micro-finance. The importance of financial globalisation will also be investigated. Finally, the rest of the class will be devoted to deciphering the causes and consequences of the current financial crisis. 
 
 Behavioural Economics
  
  Behavioural Economics offers alternative theories that merge psychological insights with economic theory and are based on experimental and other evidence, that attempt to provide a better explanation of real-world behaviour. 
  This class is concerned with exploring these new behavioural theories with the aim of providing you with an expanded toolkit with which to approach ‘real-world Economics’ that is based on the burgeoning Behavioural Economics literature that has emerged over the past two or three decades. 
  After studying this, you should be able to extend much of your previously-learned knowledge in Microeconomics in various directions that take into account more realistic ways of modelling how individuals behave. 
 
 Natural Resource, Environmental & Energy Economics
  
  The module provides you with an introduction to natural resource, environmental and energy economics and policy. It focuses on the contributions of economics to understanding environmental, energy and resource problems, their causes, and the design of effective public policies to counteract them. 
  
 Psychology 
 Dissertation in Psychology
  
  The dissertation is an opportunity for you to undertake an original piece of research, closely supervised by a single member of staff. Planning for the dissertation begins in year 3, and dissertations can be of such high standards that they are subsequently published in peer-reviewed academic journals. 
 
 Advanced Organisational Behaviour
  
  This class is offered by the Strathclyde Business School, and draws on current themes in Human Resource Management understood from the perspective of micro-organisational behaviour theory and research. Although the theoretical underpinning of the material covered is primarily about work and organisational issues at the level of individual behaviour in organisations, a contextual understanding of these issues is also encouraged. 
     
 
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice I & II
  
  If you take only one of these classes, you'll choose two of the following topics. 
  If you take both these classes, you're permitted to choose four: 
   
   Qualitative Methods 
   Social Development 
   Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology 
   Cognitive Impairment in Psychological Disorders 
   Practical Aspects of Memory 
   Artificial Intelligence 
   
     
     
  
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice I & II topics
 Qualitative Methods
  
  This class will offer you the opportunity to develop a deeper theoretical and practical understanding of advanced qualitative research methodologies. It aims to support and develop your understanding of the epistemological and theoretical assumptions behind various qualitative methodologies, specifically: 
   
   discourse analysis 
   conversation analysis 
   grounded theory 
   interpretative phenomenological analysis 
   narrative analysis.   
   
 
 Social Development
  
  Social development is a specialised, though broad, area of developmental psychology. It covers the development of all aspects of social behaviour, social influence and social reasoning. This class is intended for students who already have some grounding in developmental psychology and who wish to study advanced topics in depth. 
  Particular attention is paid to the interacting contributions of biological, cognitive and environmental factors. The lecture-based component of the course covers a range of core topics. These include: 
   
   Infant social behaviour and understanding 
   attachment 
   aggression 
   gender 
   ethnicity and ethnic attitudes 
   social cognitive development 
   social development in adolescence 
   
 
 Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology
  
  This class will consider the historical and conceptual development of Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology, tracing its development from Freud’s work, through the work of the early Object Relations theorists, to modern approaches to Object Relations and Attachment theory. 
  It aims to critically assess the contribution that Psychoanalytic and Attachment theorists and practitioners can make to understanding personality. It promotes theoretical insight and reflective learning by engaging you with nomothetic studies of various aspects of psychoanalytic principles in practice such that links to discussions of theory are established. 
  In addition to lectures, you'll analyse personalities of two notable characters in history, critically assessing what unique insights into their nature's psychoanalytic theory can add to those of approaches rooted in cognitive-behavioural theories. You'll then be further encouraged to identify the links between background literature and the complexity of whole personalities.   
 
 Cognitive Impairment in Psychological Disorders
  
  This class will explore the theoretical underpinnings of the short and long term memory systems (working, episodic, semantic) and related cognitive functions (eg executive functions), the methodological issues relating to their assessment, and how aspects of cognitive function have been implicated in specific clinical disorders. 
  Lectures which explore theoretical models of these memory aspects will be followed up with more specific and applied lectures and class discussions about the role of working memory and other executive functions in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, Williams syndrome, episodic memory in Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, and cognitive control, rumination and memory in depression.   
 
 Practical Aspects of Memory
  
  The focus of this class is to highlight the issue of generalisability of psychological theory with specific reference to memory. This approach encourages you to assess theories, developed in the laboratory, for their generalisability to real life applications, and, thereby, develops their critical analysis skills. 
  The two fields which are considered are forensic and clinical psychology. In the forensic domain the areas covered relate to the accuracy and completeness of eyewitness memory, and the assessment of line-up procedures and interview techniques used by the police, with practical recommendations made as to which situations and contexts certain procedures will be useful. In terms of clinical psychology, we will largely be focusing on the validity of repressed memories, with implications for ethically treating clients, and the important role of context in determining the veracity of a claim of recovered memories.   
 
 Artificial Intelligence
  
  This class will introduce you to some of the core topics in Artificial Intelligence, of both the traditional, symbol-manipulation and the more recent connectionist varieties. AI simulations in the areas of visual perception, language, memory and learning will be discussed to allow the exploration of key theoretical debates. 
  You'll develop an understanding of the relevance of artificial intelligence for psychology, and vice versa, and contrast the ‘analytic’ approach of experimental psychology with the ‘synthetic’ approach of AI.   
 
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice III & IV
  
  If you take only one of these classes, you'll choose two of the following topics. 
  If you take both these classes, you're permitted to choose four: 
   
   Perception & Action 
   Forensic   
   Physiological Psychology 
   Psychology of Language 
   Performance Psychology 
   Health Psychology 
   Neuropsychology of Ageing & Dementia 
   
     
  
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice III & IV topics
 Perception & Action
  
  Perception and action is one of the major fields in contemporary cognitive psychology and neuropsychology. This class provides an opportunity for you to explore the field at an advanced level and achieve in-depth understanding of three key areas: 
   
   Theoretical approaches to the problem of perception, paying particular attention to the contrasting perspectives and contemporary debate between ‘information processing’ versus ‘ecological’ theories of perception.   
   The ways in which perceptual information is used in the planning and control of action both in laboratory studies and in ‘real world’ activities such as tennis, cricket, athletics, high-diving and driving.   
   The role of cognitive maps and other representations of space in controlling perceptual activity. How cognitive representations of space are used to navigate around the external environment in children versus adults, and in blind versus sighted people. We also explore some of the spatial representations found in other species and explore how these can give rise to extraordinary spatial abilities. 
   
     
 
 Forensic
  
  This class will consider the historical and conceptual development of forensic psychology. 
  It'll build on your earlier work, specifically on your knowledge of the psychology of individual differences and, more generally, on their skills in applying research methods in psychology. The class aims to critically assess the contribution that forensic psychology researchers and practitioners can make to the criminal justice system. 
  It'll promote theoretical insight and reflective learning by engaging you with both nomothetic and idiographic studies of various aspects of the work of forensic psychologists such that links to discussions of theory are established. In addition to lectures, you'll analyse real examples of the forensic psychologist’s work, specifically by reporting on the psychological dynamics of a police interview, and by applying psychological theory to the analysis of a criminal personality.   
   
 
 Physiological Psychology
  
  The main purpose of this class is to provide a selective overview of the physiological and neural substrates of motivational states. The two motivational states that are covered in this stream are hunger and sexual motivation. To help you understand these two motivational states, a number of other topics have to be covered to provide the required background knowledge: 
   
   evolution 
   the development of   the nervous system including the roles of genes and the environment in development 
   euro-anatomy 
   threats and incentives 
   self-regulation   
   sexual differentiation 
   These topics will be new to you. You must learn new vocabulary and learn about basic physiological processes and neuro-anatomy. You'll also have to integrate this information to think about the psychological implications and consequences of these neural processes.  
   
 
 Psychology of Language
  
  The class will explore some of the key issues in psycholinguistic research such as pragmatic aspects of language use, language development, second language processing. You'll understand some of the key concepts in these areas (eg common ground theory, egocentricity in language processing, language transfer), and will be able to critically evaluate the key scientific findings relating to them. You'll also appreciate the main experimental paradigms/techniques that are used in the field.   
 
 Health Psychology
  
  You'll be provided with a comprehensive grounding in the theories, methods and evidence base of health psychology. In addition, this class will provide opportunities for you to apply your knowledge to real world health problems. This combination of knowledge and practical application will enable you to make informed judgements about postgraduate study and training within the discipline. It'll also support any effort to gain employment within health related jobs, such as health promotion.   
 
 Neuropsychology of Ageing and Dementia
  
  This class will offer you the opportunity to acquire an in-depth understanding of the theories and empirical data that are relevant within the field of neuropsychology of ageing and dementia. 
  It'll cover the differences between normal and pathological decline in old age and will provide information on the neuropsychological profiles and pathologies which characterise different forms of dementia. 
  You'll learn to identify the features which can aid early diagnosis and differential diagnosis of the dementias (eg for Alzheimer's disease, Frontotemporal dementia, Vascular dementia and Parkinson’s disease dementia, Lewy body dementia). You'll become familiar with how different aspects of cognition are distributed within the brain and will be aware of the consequences of impairment. Different methodologies that are used for the study of the dementias will be explored (eg neuropsychological assessment, functional and structural neuroimaging) and you'll learn to critically evaluate the benefits and pitfalls of each method. 
     
  
 Study abroad
 Erasmus International Work Placement
  
  This class is an option which is available to a restricted number of students who'll apply to take part. It involves a placement with a European University partner working in a research team during the summer between years 3 and 4. Additional assessment is the completed during semester 1 of year 4. 
  
 