Course content 
 Year 1 
 French 
 Year 1
  
  Students take two combined classes: French 1A (semester 1), French 1B (semester 2). These courses are mainly organised around a linguistic progression towards level B1 in the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. There is a regular input of cultural background which takes the form of three lectures in semester 1 and two in semester 2 covering the following topics: 
   
 
 The Making of Modern France 
 France in a Global Context 
 Understanding the French Republic 
 French Identities 
 Contemporary French Society   
 
   
  In addition, there is an introductory lecture in semester 2 entitled ‘What is translation about?’ 
  
 Politics 
 Politics 1A: Concepts
  
  This class provides an introduction to the study of politics, in particular how modern states around the world work and interact with each other. We devote particular attention to concepts relevant to the systematic study of states in a globally connected world. We will cover a series of key concepts, ranging from the meaning of power, democracy and authoritarianism, to structures and institutions – including elections, referendums and international organisations - that are essential to understanding how modern politics works. 
  Considerable attention is given to the impact of international processes on outcomes in contemporary politics. 
 
 Politics 1B: Government & Governance
  
  This class provides an introduction to the actors, processes and outcomes that are key to modern government and governance. It covers a range of political processes that take place within democratic and non-democratic states and beyond, including for instance the role of the media. Considerable attention is given to the impact of international processes on outcomes in contemporary politics. The class examines a range of outcomes that influence the lives of citizens, including the policies associated with modern welfare states and international trade agreements. 
 
 Year 2  
 French
 
 Students take two language classes as in Year 1. The language courses are based on a series of classes.
  
 Le Monde du Travail
  
  Cultural focus:  time (35 hour week, RTT and ‘ponts’, paternity/maternity leave, …) & ‘human resources’ (hierarchical organisation, discrimination, unions, relocation,…) 
  Linguistic focus: the negation, asking questions, using pronouns. 
 
 La France et L'Europe 
  
  Cultural focus: the origins of the European ideal, Europe and the EU viewed from France. 
  Linguistic focus: subjunctive mood. 
 
 Immigration & Nationalit&eacute;
  
  Cultural focus: a historical view of immigration in France and a look at the specificity of the French ‘integration’ system. 
  Linguistic focus: the system of tenses in French (concentrating on past tenses). 
 
 Les Femmes en Politique 
  
  Cultural focus: a further look (after first year) at French politics, concentrating on topical issues. 
  Linguistic focus: modal verbs. 
 
 Les R&eacute;gions
  
  Cultural focus: decentralisation, importance of regions in France. 
  Linguistic focus: the passive voice. 
 
 L’&Eacute;conomie
  
  Cultural focus: the French economy (role of the state, …), marketing &agrave; la fran&ccedil;aise 
  Linguistic focus: equivalent of –ing in French. 
  In addition, students specialising in French take  the French  Culture and History 2 class. This class focuses on the Occupation and French Colonialism/Decolonisation. The historical context for each topic is first set, and documents from the two periods studied, before discussion moves on to the cultural domain, via analysis of the following texts and films: 
   
   Au Revoir les Enfants (film, Malle) 
   Stupeur et Tremblements (text, Nothomb) 
   L'&Eacute;tranger (text, Camus) 
   Le Samourai (film, Melville) 
   Anthology of historical texts relating to the Second World War 
   Anthology of historical texts relating to French Colonialism/Immigration 
   
  
 Politics 
 International Relations & Global Politics
  
  This class introduces students to the academic study of International Relations (IR). It examines basic and historical contexts in order to give students a firm grounding in IR. The next part of the course focuses on major theories of IR, which will provide students with conceptual understanding of world affairs. The course then examines the structures and processes within IR, covering topics such as the changing nature of war, international security and international institutions. 
 
 Modern Political Thought
  
  This class provides an introduction to fundamental political concepts, such as justice, democracy, power, authority, liberty and equality. It considers the relationship between the normative evaluation of political systems and how we study them. Students also become familiar with the basic ideologies necessary to understand political debate. 
 
 Comparative Politics
  
  This class focuses on the comparative study of institutions in democratic and authoritarian political systems and what influences their performance and stability. You'll learn what forms economic, social, cultural and political institutions take, and what their effects are on democratic and authoritarian political systems. The underlying theme of the course is the determinants and consequences of democratic and dictatorial institutions. This class enhances that knowledge by outlining research questions about democracy in its various forms and ways they can to be addressed by empirical evidence. 
 
 Year 3 
 French
 Students take two language classes (as in previous years). 
 L’Esclavage Moderne 
  
  Cultural focus: a historical review of slavery and a look at modern forms of slavery. 
  Linguistic focus: reinforcement work on subjunctive mood, passive voice and negative forms. 
 
 Les Nouvelles Fa&ccedil;ons de Consommer
  
  Cultural focus: the impact of consumerism on the environment. 
  Linguistic focus: adjectives and comparative, hypothesis, conditional mood. 
 
 Le Syst&egrave;me &Eacute;ducatif
  
  Cultural focus: a look at current issues in the French education system. 
  Linguistic focus: reported speech, imperative mood, a further look at pronouns. 
 
 L’Ann&eacute;e &agrave; l’&Eacute;tranger
  
  Cultural focus: practical module  aiming at preparing students for the year abroad. 
  There is also a French Studies 3 class: Freedom and Identity in France and the Francophone world. This class is based on the study of the following texts and films as examples of the treatment of the class’s twin themes: 
   
   Milou en mai  (film, Malle) 
   Poverty (various texts) 
   The Dreyfus Affair (various historical texts) 
   Monsieur Klein (film, Losey) 
   Rue des Boutiques Obscures  (text, Modiano) 
   National Identity in the Third Republic (various historical texts) 
   
  
 Politics 
 Quantitative Methods in Social Research
  
  The aim of this class is to teach students a range of simple quantitative research methods. Learning these improves your job prospects and equips you better for study in Honours and beyond. It'll also help you better understand the high quantity of statistics published by governments and in the media. 
 
 Research Methods for Political Scientists
  
  In this class you'll learn about different methods of: 
   
   social scientific research 
   reading 
   collecting and analysing data 
   the basic design of quantitative surveys and conducting of qualitative interviews 
   the application of the most widely used statistical software in the social sciences 
   SPSS 
   the basics of uni-variate and bi-variate statistical analysis 
   
  On the basis of the knowledge acquired in this course, students will be able to critically assess the validity and reliability of published research, to develop a research design, and to collect, analyse and present data. 
 
 European Politics
  
  This class provides a comprehensive overview of European politics, identifying the common characteristics of politics and government across the continent, but also the distinguishing features that make individual countries different. 
  Part one examines the emergence and evolution of parties and party systems, focusing on the relationship between parties and society, ideological developments and modernisation processes. Particular attention is given to the emergence of ‘new politics’ and the rise of the far right.   This part of the class concludes with an examination of the different types of electoral system employed in Europe, and the effects they have on politics. 
  Part two focuses on government; the character of government at the centre, multilevel governance, and parliaments. The class combines thematic topics with studies of politics and government in particular countries - France, Germany, Italy, and the countries of eastern and central Europe. 
 
 American Politics
  
  This class introduces students to the basic concepts and theories relating to the study of political institutions, processes, behaviour, and policy in the United States. In the first half of the class we examine ‘American exceptionalism,’ and its political culture. In the second we examine the institutions of the US political system, covering such topics as the constitution, federalism and the branches of the central government. 
  We'll also discuss: 
   
   the US party system 
   political participation and mobilisation 
   individual voting behaviour 
   public opinion 
   nominations and elections 
   media 
   interest groups 
   the question of where power lies 
   
  The class will conclude with a survey of public policy in the United States, in several dimensions. 
 
 Scottish Politics 
  
  The class seeks to provide a comprehensive overview of Scottish politics contextualising it within UK, European and world politics, historical inheritance and contemporary Scottish society. It'll examine the practice of Scotland’s governing institutions, the changing nature of democracy in Scotland, the impact of devolution on policy and broader governance as well as Scotland’s constitutional status. 
 
 Local Politics
  
  This class looks at the issue of who holds power in local politics in the UK as well as examining changing managerial and democratic practice. It asks some fundamental questions about local politics, such as: 
   
   how is local democracy justified? 
   who holds power? 
   what is the basis of that power? 
   what is the role of citizens in localities today? 
   what is the role of local governing institutions? 
   how are local public services delivered 
   how is policy made and delivered? 
   
 
 War, Terrorism & Conflict
  
  This course looks at the multi-faceted and ever-changing nature of war, conflict and terrorism, in the context of the end of the Cold War and the September 11 terrorist attacks. It addresses debates within the sub-discipline of Strategic Studies (i.e. the study of the use of force) and International Relations more broadly, relevant to the causes of war, the conditions of peace and strategies for dealing with terrorism and conflict. 
 
 Parliamentary Studies
  
  This class is co-taught with staff from the UK Parliament and the Scottish Parliament. It also involves deliberative sessions with parliamentarians. 
 
 Contemporary British Governance
  
  The class focuses on how Britain is governed, focusing particularly on how its main institutions and processes – with their own influences, conflict and dynamics – have risen to the multiple challenges of the modern world, ranging from demands for sub-national autonomy in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, to the opportunities and constraints afforded by Britain’s membership of the European Union. 
 
 Chinese Politics
  
  This class will provide a comprehensive overview of Chinese politics since 1949, contextualising it within the study of comparative politics, historical inheritance and contemporary Chinese society. 
  It will give you grounding in the dynamic evolution of the Chinese state and Chinese nationalism, China’s self-identified problems of weakness and underdevelopment, and the difficult political choices faced by political elites. It will also analyse how the country’s Communist legacy offers both opportunities and constraints for the present politics of China. The case of Taiwan is also included as a comparison. 
 
 Year abroad 
 Year abroad
 
   This is the year abroad, spent either studying at a foreign university or working as a language assistant or on a work placement. This year is compulsory to gain entry into Honours.
   
 
 Year 4 
 French 
 French
  
  The language course is based on a series of thematic dossiers dealing with current issues in France and the Francophone world. The focus of the class is on reinforcing and developing key professional language skills, such as translation into English, translation into French, liaison interpreting, and 'expos&eacute;' (formal oral presentation). 
  Students in Joint Honours French will additionally have one or more French Studies 4 classes. Everyone will take the Core Class, Images of Women, which considers the changing portrayal of women over the centuries, using the following texts as the basis of discussion: 
   
   Madame Bovary (novel, Flaubert) 
   Fatale (novel, Manchette) 
   L’&eacute;v&eacute;nement (Ernaux, novel) 
   Women in the Paris Commune of 1871 (various historical documents) 
   
  Joint Honours students not writing a dissertation in French will take these two further classes: 
   
   The Occupation and its portrayal in French films 
   France since 1945 
   
  
 Politics 
 Theories & Practices of Regulation & Governance
  
  The aim of this class is to introduce students to the concepts, theories, institutions and processes of regulatory governance. The transnational and international dimension of regulatory governance is also taken into account. 
 
 Governance & Development
  
  This class aims to investigate the political determinants of peace and prosperity, conflict and poverty. It also deals with the recent literature on conflict, inequality, and globalisation. A special emphasis will be placed on providing an understanding of the contemporary challenges facing developing countries. 
 
 Political Parties
  
  This class adopts a comparative approach to the study of political parties and party systems, focusing on Europe and the United States. We discuss the main functions and organisational and ideological characteristics of the different types of parties found in these regions, and the way in which parties adapt to social change. 
  We look at the relationship between parties and voters from the alternative theoretical perspectives of class voting, partisan identification and rational choice. We also examine party systems and party government. 
 
 Comparative Politics
  
  The class focuses on how we do comparative politics (methodology). We'll consider the comparative method, and how the scientific method can be applied to the study of politics. We consider the problem of only having a relatively small number of cases to compare, and how we select these, as well as the difference between case-study driven, small-n and large-n studies. We also consider the use of ideal types – the importance of finding a language to compare very complex systems. 
 
 Green Politics
  
  This class is divided into four main blocks: 
   
   green political theory 
   environmental attitudes & behaviour 
   environmental movements 
   green parties 
   
 
 Political Behaviour
  
  The focus of this class is the individual voter. Individual characteristics, such as education, socio-economic status, political attitudes and values, or involvement in social and political networks are looked at. However, contextual factors, such as the institutional framework, can also play a role for a wide range of political actions. 
 
 Feminism & Politics
  
  This class provides a critical introduction to feminism and its implications for politics. Over the last few decades, feminists have systematically challenged the long-standing view that politics is gender-neutral by uncovering masculinist bias and drawing attention to the neglected experiences, values and arguments of women. 
  Feminists have also reconstructed key political concepts and practices and expanded the range of issues and ideas understood to be political. 
 
 International Relations Theory in a Global Age
  
  This class explores debates about key concepts in International Relations theory, in the context of what is widely seen as a new era in the analysis and practice of global politics. The class investigates the 'cutting-edge' of IR theory and makes connections with social and political thought more generally. 
 
 International Security: Concepts & Issues
  
  Students are introduced to the literature and research agendas related to security and conflict studies. Specifically, the course will explore various aspects of civil war, terrorism, international conflict, armed transfers and refugee security. 
 
 Analysing Religion & Politics
  
  The impact of faith upon politics is evident in many ways, including: 
   
   the 1979 revolution in Iran 
   conflicts in Afghanistan and the Middle East 
   the Catholic Church's contribution to democratisation efforts in Latin America and Eastern Europe 
   the role of religious actors in current debates on Islam in the EU 
   
  The class introduces students to the systematic study of these phenomena based on a quantitative methods perspective. Qualitative approaches are also considered. As part of the class assessment, students will conduct an empirical case study. 
  
 