Course content 
 The Management Development Programme (MDP) is a core element of the undergraduate degree programme in the Strathclyde Business School. 
 The programme runs for the first three years of the BA degree. The entire class is driven by real business problems. The approach to learning is active problem-based, with students working in project teams. 
 The class aims to encourage integration of the knowledge and experience gained in Principal Subjects. Each year of the MDP focuses on different aspects of business and the content of MDP is constantly evolving and being updated and enhanced. 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Accounting 
 Course summary
  
  Introduction to accounting and finance, complemented by study of economics and law. 
  
 Finance 
 Course summary
  
  Students will receive an introduction to: 
   
   finance and accounting, which covers the basic principles of investment and value 
   the valuation of bonds and shares 
   investment decisions in business companies 
   accounting methods 
   
 
 Year 2 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
  
 Accounting 
 Course summary
  
  Students develop skills in financial and management accounting and have the opportunity to study taxation. 
  
 Finance 
 Course summary
  
  Second year classes' cover: 
   
   investment and financial decision-making and policies in business 
   risk and return and the pricing of company shares 
   portfolio selection and the efficiency of financial markets 
   the valuation of bonds and bond portfolio management 
   equity trading strategies 
   statistical and spreadsheet methods of analysing financial problems and strategies 
   
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Accounting 
 Course summary
  
  Students study advanced topics in financial and management accounting and auditing. By the end of this year, you'll normally have completed the accreditation requirements for professional accountancy bodies, provided you have taken the classes prescribed for the accredited pathway. 
  
 Finance 
 Course summary
  
  Areas covered in third year classes include: 
   
   Advanced Corporate Finance & Financial Markets Issues 
   Valuation of Derivatives 
   Operations of Derivatives Markets 
   Hedging Strategies 
   Treasury & International Financial Risk Management in Business 
   
  Advanced methods of empirical analysis, such as event studies, and access to historic and live data are also included. 
 
 Year 4 
 Accounting 
 Course summary
  
  Honours classes include: 
   
   Management Accounting Theory & Practice 
   Accounting Information Systems 
   Sustainability Accounting 
   Theory & Practice 
   Strategic Accounting & Financial Management in Entrepreneurial Firms 
   Public Sector Accounting 
   Accounting Theories 
   Accounting & Risk 
   Corporate Governance 
   Contemporary Issues in International Financial Reporting 
   Understanding 21st-century Accounting Technologies & Institutional Structures 
   Integrative Studies in Management & Accounting 
   Accounting Ethics 
   Auditing Theory & Practice & Taxation 
   
  
 Finance 
 Course summary
  
  You can either specialise in Finance as a Single Honours subject or continue to a Joint Honours degree in Finance and your other principal subject. In order to gain entry to Honours year, you must meet specified performance criteria in Years 2 and 3. 
  Students taking Single Honours in Finance will do a research dissertation in Finance, while Joint Honours students typically have the choice of doing their dissertation in either Finance or their other subject. Honours classes cover advanced topics in the following areas: 
   
   Corporate Investment 
   Corporate Financing 
   Asset Pricing 
   Portfolio Analysis 
   Derivatives 
   International Financial Management 
   Behavioural Finance 
   International Corporate Governance 
   Financial Quantitative Methods 
   
  
 