Course content 
 Year 1 
 French 
 Year 1
  
  Students take two combined classes: French 1A (semester 1), French 1B (semester 2). These courses are mainly organised around a linguistic progression towards level B1 in the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. There is a regular input of cultural background which takes the form of three lectures in semester 1 and two in semester 2 covering the following topics: 
   
 
 The Making of Modern France 
 France in a Global Context 
 Understanding the French Republic 
 French Identities 
 Contemporary French Society   
 
   
  In addition, there is an introductory lecture in semester 2 entitled ‘What is translation about?’ 
  
 Education 
 Understanding Education in the 21st Century
  
  This class introduces students to a large and rich seam of disciplinary knowledge. It is an introductory class of potential interest to all who want to understand more about Education. Some of the key content to be addressed in the module is around the following: 
   
   the field of study that is education: what it is and how we know that 
   the context of education: some contribution of political, historical and economic dimensions to curriculum, schooling, policy, globalisation 
   education achievement: some contributions of psychological, sociological and philosophical perspectives to topics such as learning, diversity, gender 
   
 
 Placement & Curriculum
  
  On this module, students from across disciplines work together to learn  about  children and the  communities in which they live; children's health and wellbeing; child protection; children's voice;  children's play and  play places. The notion  that the  health and wellbeing of children and young people is central to the advancement of society is a seminal theme in this module.   
  The placement experience has been designed to allow students to undertake a work placement with children and young people from 0 - 14 years.   Placements  will be  provided  in a range of settings outwith the mainstream classroom. 
 
 Year 2  
 French
 
 Students take two language classes as in Year 1. The language courses are based on a series of classes.
  
 Le Monde du Travail
  
  Cultural focus:  time (35 hour week, RTT and ‘ponts’, paternity/maternity leave, …) & ‘human resources’ (hierarchical organisation, discrimination, unions, relocation,…) 
  Linguistic focus: the negation, asking questions, using pronouns. 
 
 La France et L'Europe 
  
  Cultural focus: the origins of the European ideal, Europe and the EU viewed from France. 
  Linguistic focus: subjunctive mood. 
 
 Immigration & Nationalit&eacute;
  
  Cultural focus: a historical view of immigration in France and a look at the specificity of the French ‘integration’ system. 
  Linguistic focus: the system of tenses in French (concentrating on past tenses). 
 
 Les Femmes en Politique 
  
  Cultural focus: a further look (after first year) at French politics, concentrating on topical issues. 
  Linguistic focus: modal verbs. 
 
 Les R&eacute;gions
  
  Cultural focus: decentralisation, importance of regions in France. 
  Linguistic focus: the passive voice. 
 
 L’&Eacute;conomie
  
  Cultural focus: the French economy (role of the state, …), marketing &agrave; la fran&ccedil;aise 
  Linguistic focus: equivalent of –ing in French. 
  In addition, students specialising in French take  the French  Culture and History 2 class. This class focuses on the Occupation and French Colonialism/Decolonisation. The historical context for each topic is first set, and documents from the two periods studied, before discussion moves on to the cultural domain, via analysis of the following texts and films: 
   
   Au Revoir les Enfants (film, Malle) 
   Stupeur et Tremblements (text, Nothomb) 
   L'&Eacute;tranger (text, Camus) 
   Le Samourai (film, Melville) 
   Anthology of historical texts relating to the Second World War 
   Anthology of historical texts relating to French Colonialism/Immigration 
   
  
 Education 
 Learners & Learning
 
   This class provides students with an essential understanding of human learning processes and the needs of learners across the life-course. 
 
 Informal Education
 
   This module investigates philosophical and pedagogical interventions beyond the school curriculum in informal settings, with adults in particular. It'll also open up possibilities for informal education techniques and practices to be considered and adopted by a range of professions and to explore potential partnerships between informal education specialists and others. 
 
 Year 3 
 French
 Students take two language classes (as in previous years). 
 L’Esclavage Moderne 
  
  Cultural focus: a historical review of slavery and a look at modern forms of slavery. 
  Linguistic focus: reinforcement work on subjunctive mood, passive voice and negative forms. 
 
 Les Nouvelles Fa&ccedil;ons de Consommer
  
  Cultural focus: the impact of consumerism on the environment. 
  Linguistic focus: adjectives and comparative, hypothesis, conditional mood. 
 
 Le Syst&egrave;me &Eacute;ducatif
  
  Cultural focus: a look at current issues in the French education system. 
  Linguistic focus: reported speech, imperative mood, a further look at pronouns. 
 
 L’Ann&eacute;e &agrave; l’&Eacute;tranger
  
  Cultural focus: practical module  aiming at preparing students for the year abroad. 
  There is also a French Studies 3 class: Freedom and Identity in France and the Francophone world. This class is based on the study of the following texts and films as examples of the treatment of the class’s twin themes: 
   
   Milou en mai  (film, Malle) 
   Poverty (various texts) 
   The Dreyfus Affair (various historical texts) 
   Monsieur Klein (film, Losey) 
   Rue des Boutiques Obscures  (text, Modiano) 
   National Identity in the Third Republic (various historical texts) 
   
  
 Education 
 History & Philosophy of Education
  
  This module will support students in developing their knowledge and understanding of the roots of some key educational ideas in history. These will be considered from a philosophical perspective. 
 
 Children & Childhood
  
  This module will focus on children and childhood in contexts other than formal education settings that will be explored elsewhere. The aim of this module is to introduce students to the concepts of child and childhood through a range representations. The class will draw on children in film, art and literature to explore representations of children and childhood and experiences of childhood. 
 
 Social Pedagogy with Adults
  
  This module is based on an understanding of the evolution of adult learning and the resultant principles that underline current practice and will illustrate how adult educators work and will also open up possibilities for adult education techniques and practices to be considered. It'll also explore potential partnerships between adult educators and others. 
 
 Year abroad 
 Year abroad
 
   This is the year abroad, spent either studying at a foreign university or working as a language assistant or on a work placement. This year is compulsory to gain entry into Honours.
   
 
 Year 4 
 French 
 French
  
  The language course is based on a series of thematic dossiers dealing with current issues in France and the Francophone world. The focus of the class is on reinforcing and developing key professional language skills, such as translation into English, translation into French, liaison interpreting, and 'expos&eacute;' (formal oral presentation). 
  Students in Joint Honours French will additionally have one or more French Studies 4 classes. Everyone will take the Core Class, Images of Women, which considers the changing portrayal of women over the centuries, using the following texts as the basis of discussion: 
   
   Madame Bovary (novel, Flaubert) 
   Fatale (novel, Manchette) 
   L’&eacute;v&eacute;nement (Ernaux, novel) 
   Women in the Paris Commune of 1871 (various historical documents) 
   
  Joint Honours students not writing a dissertation in French will take these two further classes: 
   
   The Occupation and its portrayal in French films 
   France since 1945 
   
  
 Education 
 Compulsory classes
 Dissertation
  
  The Dissertation in Education is designed to further students’ development of a questioning, self-evaluative and reflective approach in a major in-depth piece of work demanding independent, self-motivated study and the sustained application of professional research and enquiry skills. 
  The widest possible range of topics, types of project, modes of enquiry and of research techniques is encouraged. What projects have in common is the individual student’s ownership and control of the project and the expectation of high quality work. 
  
 Elective classes
 Choose from this list
 Policy & Politics in Education
  
  This class will provide students with the opportunity to engage in debate about current issues in education through detailed exploration of the policy and political contexts. It will introduce students to frameworks for understanding how policy comes about and how it is inextricably linked with political issues. 
 
 Social Issues in Education
  
  This class will teach students about the responsibility of teachers for the education, health and well-being of all children, in the context of a complex and diverse society.   It will also address the needs of those who will work with children, young people and adults in a variety of education-related contexts through its focus on a range of key social issues and the relevant national legislative and policy framework. 
 
 Social Research Methods
  
  This class prepares you for designing and completing a research project. It will equip you with the skills and knowledge required in planning and delivering a research project. 
  
 