Course content 
 Year 1 
 Criminal Law
  
  This course considers everything from the theory of why and how someone is held responsible for criminal actions, to many specific crimes, including murder, the less serious crimes of personal violence, crimes of dishonesty, breach of the peace and attempting to pervert the course of justice. 
 
 Legal Methods
  
  The aims of this class are to: 
   
   provide students with a basic knowledge of the history, structure and institutions of the Scottish legal system 
   provide students with the skills required to find, interpret and analyse the law applicable in Scotland, from all their various sources 
   introduce students to competing conceptions of law 
   introduce students to legal reasoning 
   
 
 Legal Process
 
   The aims of this class are to: 
   
   enable students to comprehend the structure, function, operation and proposals for reform of the courts and tribunals in Scotland 
   introduce students to the institutions and people involved in legal processes in Scotland 
   expose students to an established body of socio-legal scholarship on legal process and to encourage students to use this knowledge to critically assess liberal rule of law ideology 
   consider the professional personnel who inhabit the legal world and to examine within broader social and comparative context their respective roles and functions, their recruitment, training, complaints procedures and disciplinary sanctions 
   explore on a comparative basis social, political and economic issues in relation to the provision of legal services in Scotland 
   
 
 Law & Society
  
  This class engages with some challenging problems faced by law within contemporary society. It introduces students to some aspects of the social, political, and ethical conditions in which law operates. It deals with the interaction of law with justice, politics, morals and equality. The course will examine the role and challenges of law in times of social change. The course is structured around three key themes: 
   
   legal reasoning 
   law & politics 
   law & social change 
   
     
 
 Public Law 1
  
  Following on from the introduction to the constitution – its key actors, institutions and their functions – in Public Law 1, students taking Public Law 2 will build upon that knowledge here: first by focusing on the ways in which legal (judicial review) and quasi-legal (tribunals, public inquiries, ombudsmen) bodies supervise the exercise of constitutional and administrative decision making; secondly, by a detailed analysis of the political and legal mechanisms which exist for the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms. As such, Public Law 2 is concerned with the abuse of power, and the ways and means by which power can be limited and held to account – whether that is the power of a golf club to suspend an unruly member, the power of a local authority to order the compulsory purchase of privately owned property, or the power of the Prime Minister to wage war. 
 
 Voluntary Obligations: Contract & Promises
  
  While the most obvious aim of this course is to familiarise students with Scottish contract law and voluntary obligations, this aim may be divided into a number of sub-aims. They are as follows: 
   
   to place voluntary obligations within the general framework of Scots Law 
   to place the Scots law of voluntary obligations within its European context 
   to analyse and explain how contracts and promises are formed 
   to analyse and explain how voluntary obligations may be vitiated and on what grounds their validity may be challenged 
   to analyse and explain the substance of contracts and how the inclusion and exclusion of rights and liabilities is circumscribed by law 
   to analyse and explain how contracts break down or otherwise come to an end and the remedies available when they do 
   
 
 Year 2 
 Commercial Law
  
  Commercial law is a second year compulsory subject on the LLB (and LML) degree. The class provides students with an understanding of commercial law in a Scottish context. It partially meets the commercial law subject requirements and related skills outcomes of the Law Society of Scotland and the Faculty of Advocates (albeit that some of the commercial professional topics, eg sale of goods and insurance law, are dealt with by other courses). 
  Building on the knowledge acquired by students in first year, the general academic objective of the course is to examine the basic principles and rules concerning core aspects of commercial law, including the main principles of agency, partnership and company law, the law relating to various methods of payment (including consumer credit and bills of exchange) the rules governing the ways in which creditors can ‘secure’ repayment of a debt (eg through taking personal guarantees from third parties for repayment of the debt, or by establishing rights in security over debtor property); the basic principles of diligence; the consequences of both corporate and individual debtor inability to repay debts (corporate insolvency and personal bankruptcy respectively). 
  While the focus of the class is on ‘a black letter’ analysis of relevant statutory and common law in the broad commercial area, in order to aid understanding of relevant principles, the class also examines the policy rationales underlying the current law and recent and projected reforms in this area. 
 
 Domestic Relations
  
  Family law concerns the control which the law exerts over domestic relationships and families; it affects everyone to a greater or lesser degree. 
  Topics include: 
   
   the legal status of children, parental responsibilities and rights and the upbringing of children - including issues in adoption and fostering, local authority care and the Children's Hearing system 
   legal consequences of marriage/civil partnership 
   divorce - including what happens to the family and its financial consequences 
   unmarried domestic relations, opposite-sex and same-sex 
   
 
 EU Law 
  
  The EU law class focuses on the constitutional and institutional order of the EU as well as on the internal market. To this end, the class looks at the European integration process, the EU institutions, EU competences, the decision-making process within the EU, the principles underpinning the EU legal order and the principles governing the internal market. 
 
 Property Trusts & Succession
  
  The general rationale of this class is to provide students with a contemporary understanding of the law of property, trusts and succession in Scotland, and to meet Law Society of Scotland requirements in this subject-area. 
 
 Involuntary Obligations: Delict & Unjustified Enrichment
  
  The design of this class is primarily aimed at enhancing students’ ability to read cases, deal with case law and apply the techniques of case-analysis and common law development. 
  The student will acquire an in-depth and up to date knowledge and understanding, from both a legal and a social perspective, of the rules of law governing involuntary obligations, that is to say the law of delict and the law of unjustified enrichment. 
  Students will acquire the ability to apply the rules of law to particular fact situations in order to provide definitive answers to the problems exposed in these situations. 
  Students will develop critical and reasoning skills, giving them the ability to make and present personal and informed judgments on the rules of law and their application within the domestic legal system. 
 
 Public Law 2 
  
  Following on from Public Law 1, Public Law 2 aims to consolidate knowledge and understanding of constitutional and administrative law. Students taking this class will require to have taken Public Law 1 in the first year. It'll build upon knowledge of the key concepts and institutions of the UK constitution. As a second year class, its rationale is to give students the opportunity to progress from an understanding of the constitution to an understanding of the role of the law in the constitutional control of public power. This course encourages students to adopt an evaluative and critical stance towards ongoing constitutional developments. The course will focus on control of administrative action, both by the judiciary and by ombudsmen. The protection of individual rights will be a key feature, focusing on judicial protection but also encompassing the role of human rights institutions in the UK and Scotland. The future control of public power will be discussed, including topical debates concerning constitutional reform in this area. 
 
 Year 3 
 English Law of Property and Land
  
  This class is designed to provide you with  in-depth  knowledge and critical understanding of some of the core theories and rules  underpinning Property and Land Law.   
 
 English Criminal Law & evidence
  
  This class will provide you with knowledge of the key concepts of criminal law, the principal criminal offences, the defences available, and the main rules of evidence. 
 
 English Law of Tort
  
  This class is designed  to provide you with a broad knowledge of the defining features and main areas of the English Law of Tort.   
 
 Evidence
  
  The main focus of the course is on providing an overview of how the handling and proving of facts works in law and how this interacts with the law of evidence. The emphasis is on understanding and application, rather than the learning of the specific details of legal rules. 
  The course has three general academic aims: 
   
   to introduce students to theoretical and practical issues relating to the use and proof of facts in the Scottish legal system 
   introduce students to the central concepts, rules and principles of the Scots law of Evidence 
   give students an understanding of the interrelationship between the theory, practice and law relating to the use and proof of facts in the Scottish legal system 
   
 
 English Law of Contract & Restitution
  
  This class will provide you with broad knowledge of the main areas of Contract Law and Restitution.   
 
 English Law of Equity & Trusts
  
  This class is designed to provide you with  broad knowledge of the scope, defining features, and main areas of Equity and Trusts. 
 
 Year 4 
 Optional
 
   As an Honours student you'll take four elective classes as well as write an 11,000-word dissertation. 
  
 