Course content 
 Years 1 and 2 look at Bioscience, Chemistry, Maths, Physics or Biophysics, Basic and Clinical Immunology, Organic Chemistry, Physiological Basis of Drug Action. In Years 3 and 4 you'll take specialist classes in Immunology and Pharmacology and Microbiology. 
 In Year 4 you'll undertake a research project in Immunology or Pharmacology and present a dissertation of the work. 
 Year 1
 
 All full-time students will undertake all compulsory classes and one elective class.
  
 Compulsory classes 
 Foundation Bioscience & Statistics
  
  The aims of this class include: 
   
   introducing the process of scientific discovery through the analysis and retrieval and evaluation of information using appropriate search engines, and the synthesis of new ideas 
   developing a range of writing and presentation skills, which will benefit you, not only throughout University, but also in your future career 
   giving you an understanding of basic skills in statistical analysis of data 
   
 
 Molecular Bioscience
  
  This class will familiarise you with the basic knowledge and concepts of cell structure and function. You'll also be introduced to the basic concepts underlying classical and molecular genetics, including techniques that form the basis for the study of molecular biology. 
 
 Biology of Organisms
  
  The aims of this class include: 
   
   introducing you to the biology of microbes, plants and animals 
   introducing you ﻿to physiological systems 
   
 
 Practical Bioscience & Skills Development 1
  
  This class will introduce you to laboratory-based practical bioscience. You'll be enabled to analyse your personal and key skills and plan your development. 
 
 Chemistry for Bioscience
 
   To provide you with fundamental concepts of general chemistry. 
 
 Year 2 
 Compulsory classes 
 Introduction to Infection & Immunity
  
  This class will provide you with an introduction to the diversity of infectious agents and how the immune response of the mammalian host attempts to clear infection. 
  Lectures will cover aspects of bacterial, parasitic, viral and fungal infections, describing pathogens, the diseases they cause and mechanisms of control. Lectures will also describe many of the key components of the immune system, before examining how these factors play a role in mediating defence against different infections. 
 
 Nutritional Biochemistry & Metabolism
  
  The aims of this class are to: 
   
   To demonstrate the general principles of the design of metabolism, the way in which major pathways are integrated and regulated through signal transduction and the role of metabolism in nutrition 
   To provide a biochemical basis for understanding inborn errors of metabolism and metabolism in disease states   
   To demonstrate the role of enzymes in controlling metabolic pathways 
   
 
 Cell & Molecular Biology
  
  The aims of this class are: 
   
   To demonstrate the role of genetic analysis in the elucidation of the mechanisms of gene function 
   To provide an introduction to cytology and histology 
   To develop a deeper understanding of cellular compartments and structures and their functions   
   
 
 Practical Bioscience & Skills Development 2
  
  The aims of this class are: 
   
   To develop skills for laboratory work in Biomedical Sciences 
   To reinforce understanding of key principles of core subjects taught in 2nd year 
   To enable you to analyse your personal and key skills and plan your development 
   To introduce you to the type of analytic methods used in the different degree disciplines ie Biomedical Science, Biochemistry, Forensic Biology, Immunology, Microbiology and Pharmacology 
   
 
 Human Physiology
  
  This class will provide you with a working knowledge of normal human physiology in preparation for the study of human diseases and the uses of drugs in their treatment. 
 
 Bio-organic Chemistry
  
 
 Year 3 
 Compulsory classes 
 Laboratory Methods & Skills Development
  
  This class will  familiarise you with the current laboratory methods utilised in biomedical science research by attending laboratory sessions intended to provide a wide range of generic skills expected of laboratory science. 
  You'll also be trained in data collation and presentation and be able to write reports in a coherent and scientific manner. It's also intended that you'll gain an understanding of the underlying design of experimental studies.   
 
 Fundamental Immunology
  
  The aim of this class is to familiarise you with fundamental concepts of the immune system to form the basis for further study. 
 
 Intermediate Immunology
  
  The aims of this class are: 
   
   to familiarise you with the intermediate concepts of the immune system and aspects of clinical and laboratory practice 
   to provide a foundation for the study of year 4 immunology courses   
   
 
 Fundamentals of Pharmacology
  
  This class is a mixture of lectures and CAL labs. It aims to develop skills that will form core learning for both pharmacology and experimental research in the subsequent years of the joint pharmacology degrees. Topics covered include: 
   
   an in introduction to the concepts of receptors agonists and antagonists, chemical transmission, selectivity of drug action 
   pharmacology of synaptic transmission 
   receptor-response coupling 
   drugs affecting synthesis, storage, release, uptake and metabolism of neurotransmitters 
   alpha and beta-adrenoceptors 
   GABA-receptors 
   glutamate receptors 
   drugs and ion channels 
   eicosanoids and autacoids 
   report writing - scientific writing skills, calculations from given experimental data, interpretation of experimental data 
   
 
 Drugs & Disease 1
  
  This class has been designed to enable you to integrate your knowledge of various areas of pharmacology, develop detailed knowledge and have a critical understanding of current and future drug treatment of selected major diseases. In addition, you'll develop critical analytical skills in interpreting cardiovascular experimental data. 
  In particular, this class looks at: 
   
   health and illness 
   normal and abnormal body function 
   aetiology and epidemiology of major diseases and the principles of their drug treatment 
   symptoms recognition and management 
   molecular bases of drug action 
   therapeutic uses of drugs in man 
   prediction of drug properties, cell and molecular biology of relevance to pharmacy 
   biological methods of measuring drug activity 
   
     
 
 Year 4 
 Compulsory classes 
 Research in Biomedical Sciences
  
  The aims of this class are: 
   
   to provide training in skills required for carrying out a research project 
   to develop an awareness of ethical issues in biomedical research 
   to develop higher order cognitive abilities of analysis, synthesis and evaluation 
   to develop personal skills 
   
 
 Honours Immunology 1
  
  The lectures consist of a series of advanced topics designed to expand and consolidate the basic immunological knowledge from year 2 and 3 lectures. 
  The aim of the class is to advance knowledge of cellular and molecular immunology and gain a broad understanding of its basic concepts.   
 
 Honours Immunology 2
  
  The lectures consist of a series of advanced topics designed to expand and consolidate the basic immunological knowledge from year 2 and 3 lectures. The aim of the class is to advance knowledge of the subject of immunology and gain a broad understanding of its basic concepts and role in clinical immunology. 
 
 Honours Pharmacology 1
  
  This class builds upon the previous learning in physiology, pathophysiology and pharmacology. The class will revise certain aspects of pathophysiology and pharmacology from previous levels. 
  You'll also gain knowledge of novel drugs that are in late pre-clinical or early clinical development or recent concepts that may lead to novel drug therapy. This will enable you to critically evaluate original research papers and improve your oral communication skills. 
 
 Honours Pharmacology 2
  
  This class will give you a strong knowledge base in a number of areas of pharmacology. It will help you to understand the current and future drug treatments of a wide range of selected diseases. The class also contains elements designed to help you develop skills in interpreting pharmacological information and data. 
  Topics covered include: 
   
   an introduction to neuropathology 
   the actions, uses, mechanisms of action and side-effects of drugs used to treat anxiety disorders, affective disorders (mania and depression) epilepsy, schizophrenia, neurodegenerative disorders (Alzheimer's, Parkinsonism, Huntington's chorea) 
   alcohol and drug abuse 
   pain and analgesics 
   endocrine diseases and their treatment (adrenal cortical insufficiency, Cushing's disease, diabetes mellitus, thyroid disorders, menopausal syndrome) 
   therapeutic uses of glucocorticoids 
   antifertility agents 
   interpretation of pharmacological data 
   cancer chemotherapy 
   bacterial chemotherapy 
   adverse drug reactions 
   disorders of the gastrointestinal tract 
   malaria 
   introduction to central nervous system disorders and their treatment   
   
  
 