Course content 
 Year 1 
 Principles of Prosthetic & Orthotic Design 1
  
  This class provides you with a basic grounding in the theory & application of the broad engineering sciences that underpin prosthetic & orthotic practice. 
 
 Introduction to Health Service Research
  
  This class provides you with knowledge and skills so that you may adopt systematic approaches to gathering and interpreting information from a wide range of sources. 
 
 Human Biological Science 1
  
  This class will give you a general understanding of key concepts in human anatomy and general pathophysiology to act as a basis for discussion in this and subsequent modules. 
  The physiology and pathophysiology of skin and cardiovascular system pathologies are examined in detail. The basic changes in metabolism that occur in diabetes are studied. 
 
 Foundations for Interprofessional Practice
  
  The class will introduce you to current developments of policy and processes that direct the delivery of health and social care. It will enable you to identify key principles of partnership working through an awareness of the qualities and attributes of Health and Social care professionals. 
 
 Prosthetics & Orthotics Professional & Technical Skills
  
  Professional aspects 
  The aim is for you to: 
   
   develop a patient-centred approach to the clinical practice of prosthetics and orthotics 
   develop the interpersonal and communication skills required to be able to effectively implement prosthetics and orthotics clinical and technical skills in a professional setting 
   develop the practice of self-awareness, self-appraisal, giving and receiving peer feedback, and the setting of personal and professional development objectives 
   develop the skills required to initiate and sustain lifelong learning 
   
  Technical aspects 
  The aim is to equip you with basic practical skills that will be required to enable you to complete the prosthetic and orthotic science modules within the Honours degree programme. 
  It will allow you to carry out the technical skills which are necessary within a clinical and technical prosthetic and orthotic service delivery setting. 
 
 Prosthetic & Orthotic Science 1
  
  You'll develop knowledge, understanding and clinical skills (involving real patient experience) in the lower limb prosthetics and orthotics practice and patient management. This module will be in two sections: 
   
   An introduction to the practical clinical skills which underpin prosthetic and orthotic practice 
   Trans-tibial, ankle disarticulation and partial foot prosthetic science. 
   
 
 Year 2 
 Professional Skills for Healthcare 2
  
  This class aims to help you: 
   
   develop a patient-centred approach to the clinical practice of prosthetics and orthotics 
   enhance your interpersonal and communication skills 
   encourage exploration and appreciation of ethical and moral issues in relation to the provision of prosthetic and orthotic services within the wider healthcare context 
   
 
 Human Biological Sciences 2
  
  This class will provide knowledge of: 
   
   the aetiology and pathogenesis of congenital disorders 
   the physiology and pathophysiology of the nervous system 
   the detailed anatomy of the upper limb and spinal column and cord 
   
 
 Principles of Prosthetic and Orthotic Design 2
 
   Builds on the basic grounding provided on Principles of Prosthetic and Orthotic Design﻿  1. You'll learn to generalise the approaches & methodologies adopted in year 1 to a broader case set. 
 
 Prosthetics and Orthotics Science 2
  
  This class will provide you with a knowledge and understanding of lower limb prosthetic and orthotic rehabilitation and management based on a patient centred approach. You'll gain knowledge of the basic and advanced clinical and technical requirements of becoming a competent and professional practitioner. 
  Cross-curricular, sequential links with other relevant and complementary modules will be established, e.g. human biological sciences, professional skills for healthcare, principles of prosthetic and orthotic design, and health services research. 
 
 Elective Class
  
  You'll take an elective class of your own choice. 
 
 Year 3 
 Human Biological Science 3
  
  This class will provide knowledge of the structure and functioning of skeletal muscle tissue. The effects of exercise on the respiratory, cardiovascular and skeletal muscle systems will be considered. 
  You'll develop an understanding of the pathophysiological changes underlying conditions affecting locomotion. Selected pathologies of particular relevance to prosthetic and orthotic practice will be covered in depth, including stroke, diabetes and contractures. 
 
 Principles of Prosthetic and Orthotic Design 3
  
  The aim of this class is to develop your skills to recognise and respond to the trends that shape prosthetics & orthotics. 
 
 Prosthetics and Orthotic Science 3 with Applied Health Service Research
  
  This class aims to give you the knowledge and practical application of: 
   
   Upper Limb Prosthetics and Orthotics (all levels) 
   Spinal Orthotics (all levels) 
   Case Studies (assessing complex multi-level patients) 
   Applied Health Services Research (statistics, research ethics and research methodology) 
   
 
 Prosthetics/Orthotics Clinical Placement
  
  Students in years 3 & 4 are required to undertake two periods of clinical placement; one in prosthetics and one in orthotics. 
  Each placement is for a minimum of 4 months. You're placed in approved clinical facilities under the direction of a designated supervisor. 
 
 Year 4 
 Compulsory classes 
 Prosthetics/Orthotics Clinical Placement 2
  
  Students in years 3 & 4 are required to undertake two periods of clinical placement; one in prosthetics and one in orthotics. 
  Each placement is for a minimum of 4 months. You're placed in approved clinical facilities under the direction of a designated supervisor. 
 
 Project
  
  This project is intended to develop the skills of critical appraisal, analysis, review of the literature and presentation skills at level 4 of the BSc (Hons) Prosthetics and Orthotics degree programme. 
  
 Elective classes
 Choose one from this list 
 Upper Limb Prosthetics
  
  The class builds on the introduction to upper limb prosthetics studied in Prosthetics and Orthotics Science 3. You'll gain knowledge of advanced clinical and technical aspects required to become a competent and professional practitioner. 
 
 Hip, Knee & Ankle Disarticulation Prosthetics
  
  The class builds on the introduction to ankle, knee and hip disarticulation prosthetics studied in Prosthetics and Orthotics Science 1, 2 and 3. You'll gain knowledge of advanced clinical and technical aspects required to become a competent and professional practitioner. 
 
 Lower Limb Prosthetic Design
  
  The class builds on the introduction to prosthetics socket design, components and materials studied in Prosthetics and Orthotics Science 1, 2 and 3. You'll gain knowledge of advanced clinical and technical aspects required to become a competent and professional practitioner. 
 
 Orthotic Management of Spinal Deformity
  
  This class helps you to acquire the knowledge and understanding of the sciences which underpin the orthotic management of common spinal deformities. In addition, you'll formulate and analyse treatment protocol for management of these patient groups. 
 
 Orthotic Management of Neurological Conditions
  
  This class will: 
   
   present a multidisciplinary and patient-centred approach to the orthotic management of neurological disorders 
   enable students to synthesise and analyse their knowledge of the role of lower limb orthoses in the management of neurological disorders 
   review the available evidence base for orthotic intervention in neurological disorders, and use this to inform practice 
   
 
 Clinical Governance
  
  The course will help you to gain knowledge of: 
   
   the core principles of clinical governance 
   practical and clinically relevant lessons on improving healthcare services from current national and international work 
   relevant references and reading 
   
 
 Clinical Gait Analysis
  
  This class will give you an appreciation of the methods and levels of accuracy of those gait assessment techniques that are currently available. They range from the simple to the sophisticated, (or the inexpensive to the costly), and the advantages and limitations of each will be explored. 
  The module will help you to develop an awareness and practical understanding of the interpretation of the data and its relevance to clinically observed conditions. 
 
 Orthotic Management of the Diabetic Foot
  
  You'll gain the knowledge and understanding of the sciences which underpin the orthotic management of the diabetic foot. 
  This class builds on the knowledge gained from an introduction to the orthotic management of the diabetic foot in Prosthetics & Orthotics Science 2. In addition, you'll formulate and analyse treatment protocol for management of this patient group. 
 
 Paediatric Prosthetics
  
  The class builds on the introduction to prosthetics socket design, components and materials studied in Prosthetics & Orthotics Science 1, 2 and 3. You'll gain knowledge of advanced clinical and technical aspects required to become a competent and professional practitioner. 
  The class will build on the cross-curricular links with other relevant and complimentary modules, e.g. human biological sciences, professional skills for healthcare, principles of prosthetic and orthotic design, and health services research. 
  
 