Course content 
 Year 1
 Along with this module, you'll also study four other classes from other departments within the Business School. 
 Managing in a Global Context
  
  This class introduces you to the complexities of the international business environment by initially looking at the critical role of the manager and leadership in organisations today. The second half of the class gives an introductory set of lectures on the various complexities of the global business environment. 
 
 Year 2
 In addition to this class, you'll also study two classes from your principal subject areas. 
 International Business Analysis
  
  This class furthers the foundation learning covered in Year 1. It gives you a grounding in the historical context of international business, global institutions, theories underpinning international trade and investment, and the main decision criteria, considerations and options facing the firm or organization that is, or is wishing to, operate internationally. 
 
 Year 3
 Along with this class, you'll study two classes from your principal subject area. If you're spending the second semester of Year 3 abroad, you'll take an equivalent class in your exchange institution. 
 Managing Across Cultures & Frontiers
  
  This class builds on the theories and concepts introduced in Managing in a Global Context in Year 1 and International Business Analysis in Year 2. It does so by focusing more on the complex cross-cultural and human resource issues associated with the implementation of international business practice and strategies. 
 
 Year 4
 Along with this class, you'll also study one class from your principal subject area and one International Business elective. 
 Contemporary Issues & Trends in International Business
  
  The class aims to introduce students to a range of contemporary issues impacting on business organisations and managers operating in an international context. It encourages students to think critically about recent trends and issues and provides them with a range of conceptual models and analytical tools appropriate to the changing landscape of international business.     
 
 International Business electives
  
   
   Management, Enterprise & the Rise of the Global Economy 
   International Entrepreneurship 
   International Business Management 
   Electronic Commerce 
   Project Management 
   Human Resources in the Global Economy 
   
  
 