Course content 
 Year 1 
 Italian 
 Italian 1A 
  
  This intensive class, for those with SQA ‘Higher’ or equivalent, will enable you to develop the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A2 of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Italian 1B 
  
  Following on from Italian 1A, this intensive programme will broaden your knowledge of the Italian language, and enhance basic skills already acquired in reading, writing, listening and speaking. It'll also introduce you to new aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
  
 
 or﻿
 
 Introduction to Italian 1A 
  
  This intensive class, for beginners or false beginners, will enable you to develop the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A1 of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Introduction to Italian 1B 
  
  Following on from Introduction to Italian 1A, this accelerated and intensive programme will broaden your knowledge of the Italian language, and enhance basic skills already acquired in reading, writing, listening and speaking. It'll also introduce you to new aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
  
 Politics 
 Politics 1A: Concepts
  
  This class provides an introduction to the study of politics, in particular how modern states around the world work and interact with each other. We devote particular attention to concepts relevant to the systematic study of states in a globally connected world. We will cover a series of key concepts, ranging from the meaning of power, democracy and authoritarianism, to structures and institutions – including elections, referendums and international organisations - that are essential to understanding how modern politics works. 
  Considerable attention is given to the impact of international processes on outcomes in contemporary politics. 
 
 Politics 1B: Government & Governance
  
  This class provides an introduction to the actors, processes and outcomes that are key to modern government and governance. It covers a range of political processes that take place within democratic and non-democratic states and beyond, including for instance the role of the media. Considerable attention is given to the impact of international processes on outcomes in contemporary politics. The class examines a range of outcomes that influence the lives of citizens, including the policies associated with modern welfare states and international trade agreements. 
 
 Year 2 
 Italian 
 Italian 2A 
  
  This class will introduce you to more complex and formal areas of language, and enable you to develop further the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It will also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This course aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Italian 2B
  
  This class will introduce you to yet more complex and formal areas of language, and enable you to develop further the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This course aims to bring you up to level B1+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Modern Italy - State, Culture & Society
  
  This class provides a comprehensive overview of the major developments in Italian history, society and culture from the Unification to the present day. In Semester 1, you'll study 20th century Italian social, political and cultural history, while in Semester 2, you'll analyse a range of films and a literary text. This is an interdisciplinary class which can be taken by students with no knowledge of Italian. 
  
 Politics 
 International Relations & Global Politics
  
  This class introduces students to the academic study of International Relations (IR). It examines basic and historical contexts in order to give students a firm grounding in IR. The next part of the course focuses on major theories of IR, which will provide students with conceptual understanding of world affairs. The course then examines the structures and processes within IR, covering topics such as the changing nature of war, international security and international institutions. 
 
 Modern Political Thought
  
  This class provides an introduction to fundamental political concepts, such as justice, democracy, power, authority, liberty and equality. It considers the relationship between the normative evaluation of political systems and how we study them. Students also become familiar with the basic ideologies necessary to understand political debate. 
 
 Comparative Politics
  
  This class focuses on the comparative study of institutions in democratic and authoritarian political systems and what influences their performance and stability. You'll learn what forms economic, social, cultural and political institutions take, and what their effects are on democratic and authoritarian political systems. The underlying theme of the course is the determinants and consequences of democratic and dictatorial institutions. This class enhances that knowledge by outlining research questions about democracy in its various forms and ways they can to be addressed by empirical evidence. 
 
 Year 3 
 Italian 
 Italian Language 3A
  
  This class aims to build on the students’ knowledge and understanding of the Italian language and shifts the emphasis from the acquisition of linguistic knowledge to the production of a varied linguistic output both orally and in writing. In addition to classes in written and spoken Italian students also take a course in translation from Italian into English, which includes an introduction to translation theory and practice. 
 
 Italian Language 3B
  
  This class builds on the progress students have made in Italian 3A in spoken and written language. Students take a class in translation from English into Italian and engage in a large-scale group project, which encourages the development of a range of research and presentation skills. 
 
 Italian Stage & Screen
  
  The course explores the distinctive contribution made by Italian theatre and Italian cinema. Focusing on specific texts, such as Mascagni’s Cavalleria Rusticana, Luigi Pirandello’s Sei personaggi in cerca d’autore and Dario Fo’s Morte accidentale di un anarchico, and on films such as Germi’s Divorzio all'italiana and Moretti's Caro diario, students are encouraged to engage critically with the individual works studied in their exploration of the crucial contribution which Italy has made to the development of these two genres. 
  
 Politics 
 Quantitative Methods in Social Research
  
  The aim of this class is to teach students a range of simple quantitative research methods. Learning these improves your job prospects and equips you better for study in Honours and beyond. It'll also help you better understand the high quantity of statistics published by governments and in the media. 
 
 Research Methods for Political Scientists
  
  In this class you'll learn about different methods of: 
   
   social scientific research 
   reading 
   collecting and analysing data 
   the basic design of quantitative surveys and conducting of qualitative interviews 
   the application of the most widely used statistical software in the social sciences 
   SPSS 
   the basics of uni-variate and bi-variate statistical analysis 
   
  On the basis of the knowledge acquired in this course, students will be able to critically assess the validity and reliability of published research, to develop a research design, and to collect, analyse and present data. 
 
 European Politics
  
  This class provides a comprehensive overview of European politics, identifying the common characteristics of politics and government across the continent, but also the distinguishing features that make individual countries different. 
  Part one examines the emergence and evolution of parties and party systems, focusing on the relationship between parties and society, ideological developments and modernisation processes. Particular attention is given to the emergence of ‘new politics’ and the rise of the far right.   This part of the class concludes with an examination of the different types of electoral system employed in Europe, and the effects they have on politics. 
  Part two focuses on government; the character of government at the centre, multilevel governance, and parliaments. The class combines thematic topics with studies of politics and government in particular countries - France, Germany, Italy, and the countries of eastern and central Europe. 
 
 American Politics
  
  This class introduces students to the basic concepts and theories relating to the study of political institutions, processes, behaviour, and policy in the United States. In the first half of the class we examine ‘American exceptionalism,’ and its political culture. In the second we examine the institutions of the US political system, covering such topics as the constitution, federalism and the branches of the central government. 
  We'll also discuss: 
   
   the US party system 
   political participation and mobilisation 
   individual voting behaviour 
   public opinion 
   nominations and elections 
   media 
   interest groups 
   the question of where power lies 
   
  The class will conclude with a survey of public policy in the United States, in several dimensions. 
 
 Scottish Politics 
  
  The class seeks to provide a comprehensive overview of Scottish politics contextualising it within UK, European and world politics, historical inheritance and contemporary Scottish society. It'll examine the practice of Scotland’s governing institutions, the changing nature of democracy in Scotland, the impact of devolution on policy and broader governance as well as Scotland’s constitutional status. 
 
 Local Politics
  
  This class looks at the issue of who holds power in local politics in the UK as well as examining changing managerial and democratic practice. It asks some fundamental questions about local politics, such as: 
   
   how is local democracy justified? 
   who holds power? 
   what is the basis of that power? 
   what is the role of citizens in localities today? 
   what is the role of local governing institutions? 
   how are local public services delivered 
   how is policy made and delivered? 
   
 
 War, Terrorism & Conflict
  
  This course looks at the multi-faceted and ever-changing nature of war, conflict and terrorism, in the context of the end of the Cold War and the September 11 terrorist attacks. It addresses debates within the sub-discipline of Strategic Studies (i.e. the study of the use of force) and International Relations more broadly, relevant to the causes of war, the conditions of peace and strategies for dealing with terrorism and conflict. 
 
 Parliamentary Studies
  
  This class is co-taught with staff from the UK Parliament and the Scottish Parliament. It also involves deliberative sessions with parliamentarians. 
 
 Contemporary British Governance
  
  The class focuses on how Britain is governed, focusing particularly on how its main institutions and processes – with their own influences, conflict and dynamics – have risen to the multiple challenges of the modern world, ranging from demands for sub-national autonomy in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, to the opportunities and constraints afforded by Britain’s membership of the European Union. 
 
 Chinese Politics
  
  This class will provide a comprehensive overview of Chinese politics since 1949, contextualising it within the study of comparative politics, historical inheritance and contemporary Chinese society. 
  It will give you grounding in the dynamic evolution of the Chinese state and Chinese nationalism, China’s self-identified problems of weakness and underdevelopment, and the difficult political choices faced by political elites. It will also analyse how the country’s Communist legacy offers both opportunities and constraints for the present politics of China. The case of Taiwan is also included as a comparison. 
 
 Year abroad 
 Year abroad
  
  This is the year abroad, spent either studying in an Italian university or working as a language assistant or on a work placement. This year is compulsory to gain entry into Honours. 
 
 Year 4 
 Italian 
 Italian 4 Language A (Spoken Skills) 
  
  By this stage students can deal effectively and appropriately with a wide range of normal, everyday situations in Italian, and can function in a variety of contexts. In this class we focus on the development of specific communicative skills, in a formal register. This takes the form of an esposizione in which the student speaks on a prepared topic from a particular point of view, and bilateral interpreting, in which the student is asked to act as channel of information in two languages. 
 
 Italian 4 Language B (Writing Skills)
  
  This class builds on the experiences gained in Years 1-3, and further develops student skills in writing in formal Italian. The class involves the production of pieces of writing in Italian (summaries, reports), typically based on texts in English on Italian topics. 
 
 Italian 4 Language C (Translation)
  
  Taking forward the expertise in translation students have acquired in Years 2-3, the course further develops skills in working from English into Italian and from Italian into English. 
 
 Women, Celebrity Culture & Emancipation in Post-Unification Italy
  
  This course, situated within the socio-historical contexts of both the Risorgimento period and post-unification Italy until WW1, focuses on female performance and its consumption by both female and male spectators as mediated through women writers’ journals, letters, diary entries and realist fictional accounts (novels and short stories). It examines women writers’ relation to the European context and the recurring themes featuring in their popular domestic fiction which was in wide circulation, particularly during the 1880s. 
 
 Italian Resistance Culture
  
  The course is designed to provide students with a detailed knowledge of the Italian Resistance (1943-1945) and its impact on Italian culture, politics and society. It is an interdisciplinary course which requires students to show skills in history, as well as an understanding of literary and cinematic texts. Films/literary texts vary from year to year but typically include works from a wide variety of periods. 
 
 Visions of Italian Terrorism
  
  The course examines the way our understanding of Italian terrorism has been filtered through feature films, documentaries and television programmes. As with other final year studies classes this is an interdisciplinary class, which helps students to develop a wide range of research and analytical skills. 
  
 Politics 
 Theories & Practices of Regulation & Governance
  
  The aim of this class is to introduce students to the concepts, theories, institutions and processes of regulatory governance. The transnational and international dimension of regulatory governance is also taken into account. 
 
 Governance & Development
  
  This class aims to investigate the political determinants of peace and prosperity, conflict and poverty. It also deals with the recent literature on conflict, inequality, and globalisation. A special emphasis will be placed on providing an understanding of the contemporary challenges facing developing countries. 
 
 Political Parties
  
  This class adopts a comparative approach to the study of political parties and party systems, focusing on Europe and the United States. We discuss the main functions and organisational and ideological characteristics of the different types of parties found in these regions, and the way in which parties adapt to social change. 
  We look at the relationship between parties and voters from the alternative theoretical perspectives of class voting, partisan identification and rational choice. We also examine party systems and party government. 
 
 Comparative Politics
  
  The class focuses on how we do comparative politics (methodology). We'll consider the comparative method, and how the scientific method can be applied to the study of politics. We consider the problem of only having a relatively small number of cases to compare, and how we select these, as well as the difference between case-study driven, small-n and large-n studies. We also consider the use of ideal types – the importance of finding a language to compare very complex systems. 
 
 Green Politics
  
  This class is divided into four main blocks: 
   
   green political theory 
   environmental attitudes & behaviour 
   environmental movements 
   green parties 
   
 
 Political Behaviour
  
  The focus of this class is the individual voter. Individual characteristics, such as education, socio-economic status, political attitudes and values, or involvement in social and political networks are looked at. However, contextual factors, such as the institutional framework, can also play a role for a wide range of political actions. 
 
 Feminism & Politics
  
  This class provides a critical introduction to feminism and its implications for politics. Over the last few decades, feminists have systematically challenged the long-standing view that politics is gender-neutral by uncovering masculinist bias and drawing attention to the neglected experiences, values and arguments of women. 
  Feminists have also reconstructed key political concepts and practices and expanded the range of issues and ideas understood to be political. 
 
 International Relations Theory in a Global Age
  
  This class explores debates about key concepts in International Relations theory, in the context of what is widely seen as a new era in the analysis and practice of global politics. The class investigates the 'cutting-edge' of IR theory and makes connections with social and political thought more generally. 
 
 International Security: Concepts & Issues
  
  Students are introduced to the literature and research agendas related to security and conflict studies. Specifically, the course will explore various aspects of civil war, terrorism, international conflict, armed transfers and refugee security. 
 
 Analysing Religion & Politics
  
  The impact of faith upon politics is evident in many ways, including: 
   
   the 1979 revolution in Iran 
   conflicts in Afghanistan and the Middle East 
   the Catholic Church's contribution to democratisation efforts in Latin America and Eastern Europe 
   the role of religious actors in current debates on Islam in the EU 
   
  The class introduces students to the systematic study of these phenomena based on a quantitative methods perspective. Qualitative approaches are also considered. As part of the class assessment, students will conduct an empirical case study. 
  
 