Course content 
 Year 1 
 Understanding Education in the 21st Century 
  
  This class is designed to be stimulating with a key aim of introducing Education as a discipline; one that goes beyond schools and children.    
  For example, you consider adults’ learning and begin to explore the different contexts in which Education is situated.   Furthermore, you'll examine Education from different perspectives including: history; politics; philosophy; psychology and sociology.    
  By undertaking this class , you're able to discuss relevant topics and ideas; explain why the idea of the curriculum is a difficult one; develop their skills in managing their own learning; develop their skills in working effectively in group and class situations and show that they are beginning to read and write critically.   This class provides a good introduction to the study of Education that will support students in their potential future roles, whether that is as a teacher, parent, community educator, lawyer, psychologist, journalist, civil servant or human resources manager. 
 
 Placement & Curriculum
  
  Placement learning is one of the most powerful learning experiences for you on initial teacher education programmes at the University of Strathclyde.    The seventy-hour first year placement allows you to work with children 0 – 14 years in a setting out-with a mainstream primary classroom.   This class allows for real diversity and student choice in selecting a placement.   In the past students have worked in prisons, with families, in community projects and in a whole range of settings that have helped them understand more about the development of children. 
  The on-campus programme for this class offers students from across disciplines the opportunity to work together to learn about children and the communities in which they live; children's health and wellbeing; child protection; children's voice; children's play and play places.   The notion that the health and wellbeing of children and young people is central to the advancement of society is a seminal theme in this class .   
 
 Year 2 
 Children’s Language, Literature & Literacy 
  
  In this class we introduce you to the key knowledge and key understandings that you will need to become a successful teacher of language, literacy and literature in the primary school. It will help you to understand the role of the teacher of language in three ways:   
   
 
 What you need to know yourself about language, literacy and   literature to teach it effectively ( ie CURRICULUM knowledge)   
 What you need to know about how children learn and develop as learners of language and how to use this knowledge to teach well ( ie PEDAGOGIC knowledge) 
 What you need to know about how communities and social practice, including the school and the home, support learning ( ie ECOLOGICAL knowledge) 
 
   
  The class is taught by means of lectures and tutorials. You will be expected to attend all of these, to read in order to extend your thinking and to take part in study groups. 
  You will be asked to complete a number of tasks in school to help consolidate your understanding of the complexities of teaching language, literature and literacy.   
 
 Learners & Learning
  
 
 Year 2 Pedagogy Placement
  
  You'll look at developing rationales for planning and sequence planning format. You'll also be expected to relate your learning to Curriculum for Excellence and to discuss the issues arising from each lecture. 
  Lectures and tutorials will involve preparing reading, undertaking independent and collaborative study and leading tutorial discussions and activities.   You'll be expected to work both independently and collaboratively with peers.   Comments and questions in addition to dialogue will be encouraged during tutorial sessions.   
  This class will encourage you to self-regulate your learning. This is an active process where   knowledge about topics is researched by individuals or in   groups. You'll monitor and self regulate your ability to use this knowledge.   The class views learning as a proactive activity rather than something that happens in response to teaching by the tutor.   
  In addition to the overarching theme of effective learning and teaching, the following key themes will build the class content: 
   
   interaction and presentation 
   classroom organisation 
   task design 
   developing positive classroom relationships 
   inclusion and differentiation 
   assessment and evaluation 
   principles of planning 
   issues of professionalism 
   
 
 Mathematics in the Primary School
  
  This class will provide opportunities for student teachers to consider how children learn about mathematics and numeracy as well as helping student teachers to develop their own understanding of key mathematical processes. 
  You'll explore a variety of approaches to teaching and learning in mathematics and numeracy, and consider the implications of these approaches for classroom practice. You'll consider how to develop children’s skills in numeracy and mathematics and will study the progression of specific aspects as described in Curriculum for Excellence mathematics outcomes. You'll identify and make effective use of appropriate selected contexts and resources to stimulate children’s interest in, and enthusiasm for, mathematics.   
  Furthermore, student teachers will use their school placement experience as a context through which to further develop their knowledge and skills, and to consolidate their understanding of curriculum content and teaching methodologies, in mathematics and numeracy in the primary school. 
 
 Year 3 
 Year 3
  
  In this year of the degree programme, you'll choose to study three areas in greater depth. The choice should be based on the your personal and professional development needs. 
  International study for one or two semesters is also an option in Year 3.   You'll be required to undertake a placement during an international study block. 
   
   Year 3 Pedagogy and Placement: Nursery, including a 5 week placement 
   Year 3 Pedagogy and Placement including a 6 week placement 
   History and Philosophy of Education 
   Curriculum: Science, Technology and Information Communication Technologies 
   Curriculum: The Arts (Music, Art and Design & Drama) 
   Curriculum: Exploring Global Citizenship through Social Studies, Religious and Moral Education & Physical Education 
   
 
 Year 4 
 Year 4
  
  You'll undertake a number of Education classes.   For your final school placement, you'll be able to choose the stage at which you are placed.   You'll have a choice of dissertation topic and will be able to select one option to allow you to study one aspect of the profession in greater depth.   The choices should be based on the students’ personal and professional development needs: 
   
 
 Year 4 Pedagogy and Placement, including an 11 week placement 
 Policy & Politics in Education 
 Social Issues in Education 
 Social Research Methods 
 Option class 
 Inclusive Practice in Literacy and Numeracy 
 Dissertation 
 
   
 
 Year 5 
 Optional
  
  A taught Masters programme in Year 5 has been designed into the new Primary Education framework.   This will allow you to continue your studies to Masters Level immediately after your undergraduate programme.   This is subject to the approval of the General Teaching Council for Scotland as there are currently implications for entry to the Teacher Induction Scheme if a student takes this route. 
  The fifth year includes an inter-professional/international placement.   All other modules will be taken from the new M.Ed. Framework at the University. 
  
 