Course content 
 Year 1 
 Politics 
 Politics 1A: Concepts
  
  This class provides an introduction to the study of politics, in particular how modern states around the world work and interact with each other. We devote particular attention to concepts relevant to the systematic study of states in a globally connected world. We will cover a series of key concepts, ranging from the meaning of power, democracy and authoritarianism, to structures and institutions – including elections, referendums and international organisations - that are essential to understanding how modern politics works. 
  Considerable attention is given to the impact of international processes on outcomes in contemporary politics. 
 
 Politics 1B: Government & Governance
  
  This class provides an introduction to the actors, processes and outcomes that are key to modern government and governance. It covers a range of political processes that take place within democratic and non-democratic states and beyond, including for instance the role of the media. Considerable attention is given to the impact of international processes on outcomes in contemporary politics. The class examines a range of outcomes that influence the lives of citizens, including the policies associated with modern welfare states and international trade agreements. 
  
 Psychology 
 Psychology 1a
  
  You'll take this class in semester 1 and are not expected to have any prior knowledge of psychology. It explores learning theory, developmental psychology, personality, biological psychology, and the scientific basis for psychology. 
 
 Psychology 1b
  
  This class is taught in semester 2 and covers sensation and perception, cognitive psychology, social psychology, abnormal psychology, and research methods. 
 
 Year 2 
 Politics 
 International Relations & Global Politics
  
  This class introduces students to the academic study of International Relations (IR). It examines basic and historical contexts in order to give students a firm grounding in IR. The next part of the course focuses on major theories of IR, which will provide students with conceptual understanding of world affairs. The course then examines the structures and processes within IR, covering topics such as the changing nature of war, international security and international institutions. 
 
 Modern Political Thought
  
  This class provides an introduction to fundamental political concepts, such as justice, democracy, power, authority, liberty and equality. It considers the relationship between the normative evaluation of political systems and how we study them. Students also become familiar with the basic ideologies necessary to understand political debate. 
 
 Comparative Politics
  
  This class focuses on the comparative study of institutions in democratic and authoritarian political systems and what influences their performance and stability. You'll learn what forms economic, social, cultural and political institutions take, and what their effects are on democratic and authoritarian political systems. The underlying theme of the course is the determinants and consequences of democratic and dictatorial institutions. This class enhances that knowledge by outlining research questions about democracy in its various forms and ways they can to be addressed by empirical evidence. 
  
 Psychology 
 Cognition & Neuropsychology
  
  This class reveals how our understanding of higher mental functions has been enhanced through: 
   
   theoretical and experimental studies of normal human cognition 
   neuropsychological studies of how cognitive functions may be damaged as a result of brain lesions 
   Topics covered include disorders of the perceptual system, memory and attention, and the role of the frontal lobes in planning, motivation, emotion, and personality. 
 
 Social & Health Psychology
  
  This class introduces social psychological theories and research that provide insights into why people believe what they believe, and why they behave the way they do. 
  Topics covered include attribution theory, aggression, prosocial behaviour, group influence, norms, conformity, obedience, and attitudes. 
  It ends with an introduction to health psychology, demonstrating how social psychological principles covered earlier in the class are applied to pressing, real-world health issues such as dietary behaviour, smoking/alcohol-use, and suicide. 
 
 Introduction to Research Design & Analysis
  
  You'll be introduced to the main features of measurement, research design, and statistical analysis in psychology. 
  Following a general introduction, the course presents fundamental concepts, issues, and debates in the field of research methods. 
  You'll also become familiarised with the conceptual basis for inferential statistical testing, and introduced to different inferential statistics. Finally, a brief introduction to qualitative research methods takes place. 
 
 Year 3 
 Politics 
 Quantitative Methods in Social Research
  
  The aim of this class is to teach students a range of simple quantitative research methods. Learning these improves your job prospects and equips you better for study in Honours and beyond. It'll also help you better understand the high quantity of statistics published by governments and in the media. 
 
 Research Methods for Political Scientists
  
  In this class you'll learn about different methods of: 
   
   social scientific research 
   reading 
   collecting and analysing data 
   the basic design of quantitative surveys and conducting of qualitative interviews 
   the application of the most widely used statistical software in the social sciences 
   SPSS 
   the basics of uni-variate and bi-variate statistical analysis 
   
  On the basis of the knowledge acquired in this course, students will be able to critically assess the validity and reliability of published research, to develop a research design, and to collect, analyse and present data. 
 
 European Politics
  
  This class provides a comprehensive overview of European politics, identifying the common characteristics of politics and government across the continent, but also the distinguishing features that make individual countries different. 
  Part one examines the emergence and evolution of parties and party systems, focusing on the relationship between parties and society, ideological developments and modernisation processes. Particular attention is given to the emergence of ‘new politics’ and the rise of the far right.   This part of the class concludes with an examination of the different types of electoral system employed in Europe, and the effects they have on politics. 
  Part two focuses on government; the character of government at the centre, multilevel governance, and parliaments. The class combines thematic topics with studies of politics and government in particular countries - France, Germany, Italy, and the countries of eastern and central Europe. 
 
 American Politics
  
  This class introduces students to the basic concepts and theories relating to the study of political institutions, processes, behaviour, and policy in the United States. In the first half of the class we examine ‘American exceptionalism,’ and its political culture. In the second we examine the institutions of the US political system, covering such topics as the constitution, federalism and the branches of the central government. 
  We'll also discuss: 
   
   the US party system 
   political participation and mobilisation 
   individual voting behaviour 
   public opinion 
   nominations and elections 
   media 
   interest groups 
   the question of where power lies 
   
  The class will conclude with a survey of public policy in the United States, in several dimensions. 
 
 Chinese Politics
  
  This class will provide a comprehensive overview of Chinese politics since 1949, contextualising it within the study of comparative politics, historical inheritance and contemporary Chinese society. 
  It will give you grounding in the dynamic evolution of the Chinese state and Chinese nationalism, China’s self-identified problems of weakness and underdevelopment, and the difficult political choices faced by political elites. It will also analyse how the country’s Communist legacy offers both opportunities and constraints for the present politics of China. The case of Taiwan is also included as a comparison. 
 
 Scottish Politics 
  
  The class seeks to provide a comprehensive overview of Scottish politics contextualising it within UK, European and world politics, historical inheritance and contemporary Scottish society. It'll examine the practice of Scotland’s governing institutions, the changing nature of democracy in Scotland, the impact of devolution on policy and broader governance as well as Scotland’s constitutional status. 
 
 Local Politics
  
  This class looks at the issue of who holds power in local politics in the UK as well as examining changing managerial and democratic practice. It asks some fundamental questions about local politics, such as: 
   
   how is local democracy justified? 
   who holds power? 
   what is the basis of that power? 
   what is the role of citizens in localities today? 
   what is the role of local governing institutions? 
   how are local public services delivered 
   how is policy made and delivered? 
   
 
 War, Terrorism & Conflict
  
  This course looks at the multi-faceted and ever-changing nature of war, conflict and terrorism, in the context of the end of the Cold War and the September 11 terrorist attacks. It addresses debates within the sub-discipline of Strategic Studies (i.e. the study of the use of force) and International Relations more broadly, relevant to the causes of war, the conditions of peace and strategies for dealing with terrorism and conflict. 
 
 Parliamentary Studies
  
  This class is co-taught with staff from the UK Parliament and the Scottish Parliament. It also involves deliberative sessions with parliamentarians. 
 
 Contemporary British Governance
  
  The class focuses on how Britain is governed, focusing particularly on how its main institutions and processes – with their own influences, conflict and dynamics – have risen to the multiple challenges of the modern world, ranging from demands for sub-national autonomy in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, to the opportunities and constraints afforded by Britain’s membership of the European Union. 
  
 Psychology 
 Research Methods in Psychology
  
  This class builds on year 2 and equips you with a broader, more advanced set of methodological and analytic skills. These skills are essential for carrying out the year 4 dissertation and for being able to read and understand articles published in academic journals. 
 
 Individual Differences
  
  You're encouraged to think scientifically about conceptual and practical issues related to the study of individual differences, with specific reference to intelligence and personality. You'll gain the chance to put this knowledge into practice by designing your own measurement instrument. 
 
 Cognition
  
  You'll be introduced to some of the core topics in cognitive psychology 
   
   Perception and action, particularly how we perceive time and recognise faces 
   Memory and learning, including models of episodic and working memory 
   Language,  including word production, sentence comprehension, and discourse processing 
   Thinking,  specifically problem solving, deductive reasoning and judgement and decision making. 
   
 
 Development
  
  This class reviews the ways that children develop from infancy right through to the end of adolescence. Key theories are presented and used to explore the extent to which children’s development is continuous or stage-like and whether specific skills develop more quickly than others. Issues relating to infancy, ‘theory of mind’ (understanding others’ thoughts and beliefs), executive function (planning and monitoring abilities), language, and communication form the core themes in the class. 
 
 Psychobiology
  
  The purpose of this class is to provide the opportunity for you to learn the basic principles of brain function, and to encourage you to address the implications of this understanding for their own view of how behaviour is generated. It includes coverage of electrophysiology and psychopharmacology, neuroanatomy, research methods in neuroscience. There are focused sections relating to the visual system and the motor system. 
 
 Social Psychology
  
  This class allows you to consider current ideas and positions within social psychology. Four themes drive the class 
   
   Attitudes and attitude change, covering the Theory of Planned Behaviour and the Health Belief Model 
   Identity, with a focus on social, personal and group identities 
   Prejudice, connecting both attitudes and identities, and covering a broad range of areas such as social representations, stereotyping, prejudice and conflict 
   Epistemology, where consideration is given to the theory of knowledge, how social psychological knowledge is produced, and to what effect 
   
 
 Year 4 
 Politics 
 Theories & Practices of Regulation & Governance
  
  The aim of this class is to introduce students to the concepts, theories, institutions and processes of regulatory governance. The transnational and international dimension of regulatory governance is also taken into account. 
 
 Governance & Development
  
  This class aims to investigate the political determinants of peace and prosperity, conflict and poverty. It also deals with the recent literature on conflict, inequality, and globalisation. A special emphasis will be placed on providing an understanding of the contemporary challenges facing developing countries. 
 
 Political Parties
  
  This class adopts a comparative approach to the study of political parties and party systems, focusing on Europe and the United States. We discuss the main functions and organisational and ideological characteristics of the different types of parties found in these regions, and the way in which parties adapt to social change. 
  We look at the relationship between parties and voters from the alternative theoretical perspectives of class voting, partisan identification and rational choice. We also examine party systems and party government. 
 
 Comparative Politics
  
  The class focuses on how we do comparative politics (methodology). We'll consider the comparative method, and how the scientific method can be applied to the study of politics. We consider the problem of only having a relatively small number of cases to compare, and how we select these, as well as the difference between case-study driven, small-n and large-n studies. We also consider the use of ideal types – the importance of finding a language to compare very complex systems. 
 
 Green Politics
  
  This class is divided into four main blocks: 
   
   green political theory 
   environmental attitudes & behaviour 
   environmental movements 
   green parties 
   
 
 Political Behaviour
  
  The focus of this class is the individual voter. Individual characteristics, such as education, socio-economic status, political attitudes and values, or involvement in social and political networks are looked at. However, contextual factors, such as the institutional framework, can also play a role for a wide range of political actions. 
 
 Feminism & Politics
  
  This class provides a critical introduction to feminism and its implications for politics. Over the last few decades, feminists have systematically challenged the long-standing view that politics is gender-neutral by uncovering masculinist bias and drawing attention to the neglected experiences, values and arguments of women. 
  Feminists have also reconstructed key political concepts and practices and expanded the range of issues and ideas understood to be political. 
 
 International Relations Theory in a Global Age
  
  This class explores debates about key concepts in International Relations theory, in the context of what is widely seen as a new era in the analysis and practice of global politics. The class investigates the 'cutting-edge' of IR theory and makes connections with social and political thought more generally. 
 
 International Security: Concepts & Issues
  
  Students are introduced to the literature and research agendas related to security and conflict studies. Specifically, the course will explore various aspects of civil war, terrorism, international conflict, armed transfers and refugee security. 
 
 Analysing Religion & Politics
  
  The impact of faith upon politics is evident in many ways, including: 
   
   the 1979 revolution in Iran 
   conflicts in Afghanistan and the Middle East 
   the Catholic Church's contribution to democratisation efforts in Latin America and Eastern Europe 
   the role of religious actors in current debates on Islam in the EU 
   
  The class introduces students to the systematic study of these phenomena based on a quantitative methods perspective. Qualitative approaches are also considered. As part of the class assessment, students will conduct an empirical case study. 
  
 Psychology 
 Dissertation in Psychology
  
  The dissertation is an opportunity for you to undertake an original piece of research, closely supervised by a single member of staff. Planning for the dissertation begins in year 3, and dissertations can be of such high standards that they are subsequently published in peer-reviewed academic journals. 
 
 Advanced Organisational Behaviour
  
  This class is offered by the Strathclyde Business School, and draws on current themes in Human Resource Management understood from the perspective of micro-organisational behaviour theory and research. Although the theoretical underpinning of the material covered is primarily about work and organisational issues at the level of individual behaviour in organisations, a contextual understanding of these issues is also encouraged. 
     
 
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice I & II
  
  If you take only one of these classes, you'll choose two of the following topics. 
  If you take both these classes, you're permitted to choose four: 
   
   Qualitative Methods 
   Social Development 
   Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology 
   Cognitive Impairment in Psychological Disorders 
   Practical Aspects of Memory 
   Artificial Intelligence 
   
     
     
  
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice I & II topics﻿
 Qualitative Methods
  
  This class will offer you the opportunity to develop a deeper theoretical and practical understanding of advanced qualitative research methodologies. It aims to support and develop your understanding of the epistemological and theoretical assumptions behind various qualitative methodologies, specifically: 
   
   discourse analysis 
   conversation analysis 
   grounded theory 
   interpretative phenomenological analysis 
   narrative analysis.   
   
 
 Social Development
  
  Social development is a specialised, though broad, area of developmental psychology. It covers the development of all aspects of social behaviour, social influence and social reasoning. This class is intended for students who already have some grounding in developmental psychology and who wish to study advanced topics in depth. 
  Particular attention is paid to the interacting contributions of biological, cognitive and environmental factors. The lecture-based component of the course covers a range of core topics. These include: 
   
   Infant social behaviour and understanding 
   attachment 
   aggression 
   gender 
   ethnicity and ethnic attitudes 
   social cognitive development 
   social development in adolescence 
   
 
 Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology
  
  This class will consider the historical and conceptual development of Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology, tracing its development from Freud’s work, through the work of the early Object Relations theorists, to modern approaches to Object Relations and Attachment theory. 
  It aims to critically assess the contribution that Psychoanalytic and Attachment theorists and practitioners can make to understanding personality. It promotes theoretical insight and reflective learning by engaging you with nomothetic studies of various aspects of psychoanalytic principles in practice such that links to discussions of theory are established. 
  In addition to lectures, you'll analyse personalities of two notable characters in history, critically assessing what unique insights into their nature's psychoanalytic theory can add to those of approaches rooted in cognitive-behavioural theories. You'll then be further encouraged to identify the links between background literature and the complexity of whole personalities.   
 
 Cognitive Impairment in Psychological Disorders
  
  This class will explore the theoretical underpinnings of the short and long term memory systems (working, episodic, semantic) and related cognitive functions (eg executive functions), the methodological issues relating to their assessment, and how aspects of cognitive function have been implicated in specific clinical disorders. 
  Lectures which explore theoretical models of these memory aspects will be followed up with more specific and applied lectures and class discussions about the role of working memory and other executive functions in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, Williams syndrome, episodic memory in Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, and cognitive control, rumination and memory in depression.   
 
 Practical Aspects of Memory
  
  The focus of this class is to highlight the issue of generalisability of psychological theory with specific reference to memory. This approach encourages you to assess theories, developed in the laboratory, for their generalisability to real life applications, and, thereby, develops their critical analysis skills. 
  The two fields which are considered are forensic and clinical psychology. In the forensic domain the areas covered relate to the accuracy and completeness of eyewitness memory, and the assessment of line-up procedures and interview techniques used by the police, with practical recommendations made as to which situations and contexts certain procedures will be useful. In terms of clinical psychology, we will largely be focusing on the validity of repressed memories, with implications for ethically treating clients, and the important role of context in determining the veracity of a claim of recovered memories.   
 
 Artificial Intelligence
  
  This class will introduce you to some of the core topics in Artificial Intelligence, of both the traditional, symbol-manipulation and the more recent connectionist varieties. AI simulations in the areas of visual perception, language, memory and learning will be discussed to allow the exploration of key theoretical debates. 
  You'll develop an understanding of the relevance of artificial intelligence for psychology, and vice versa, and contrast the ‘analytic’ approach of experimental psychology with the ‘synthetic’ approach of AI.   
 
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice III & IV
  
  If you take only one of these classes, you'll choose two of the following topics. 
  If you take both these classes, you're permitted to choose four: 
   
   Perception & Action 
   Forensic   
   Physiological Psychology 
   Psychology of Language 
   Performance Psychology 
   Health Psychology 
   Neuropsychology of Ageing & Dementia 
   
     
  
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice III & IV topics
 Perception & Action
  
  Perception and action is one of the major fields in contemporary cognitive psychology and neuropsychology. This class provides an opportunity for you to explore the field at an advanced level and achieve in-depth understanding of three key areas: 
   
   Theoretical approaches to the problem of perception, paying particular attention to the contrasting perspectives and contemporary debate between ‘information processing’ versus ‘ecological’ theories of perception.   
   The ways in which perceptual information is used in the planning and control of action both in laboratory studies and in ‘real world’ activities such as tennis, cricket, athletics, high-diving and driving.   
   The role of cognitive maps and other representations of space in controlling perceptual activity. How cognitive representations of space are used to navigate around the external environment in children versus adults, and in blind versus sighted people. We also explore some of the spatial representations found in other species and explore how these can give rise to extraordinary spatial abilities. 
   
     
 
 Forensic
  
  This class will consider the historical and conceptual development of forensic psychology. 
  It'll build on your earlier work, specifically on your knowledge of the psychology of individual differences and, more generally, on their skills in applying research methods in psychology. The class aims to critically assess the contribution that forensic psychology researchers and practitioners can make to the criminal justice system. 
  It'll promote theoretical insight and reflective learning by engaging you with both nomothetic and idiographic studies of various aspects of the work of forensic psychologists such that links to discussions of theory are established. In addition to lectures, you'll analyse real examples of the forensic psychologist’s work, specifically by reporting on the psychological dynamics of a police interview, and by applying psychological theory to the analysis of a criminal personality.   
   
 
 Physiological Psychology
  
  The main purpose of this class is to provide a selective overview of the physiological and neural substrates of motivational states. The two motivational states that are covered in this stream are hunger and sexual motivation. To help you understand these two motivational states, a number of other topics have to be covered to provide the required background knowledge: 
   
   evolution 
   the development of   the nervous system including the roles of genes and the environment in development 
   euro-anatomy 
   threats and incentives 
   self-regulation   
   sexual differentiation 
   These topics will be new to you. You must learn new vocabulary and learn about basic physiological processes and neuro-anatomy. You'll also have to integrate this information to think about the psychological implications and consequences of these neural processes.  
   
 
 Psychology of Language
  
  The class will explore some of the key issues in psycholinguistic research such as pragmatic aspects of language use, language development, second language processing. You'll understand some of the key concepts in these areas (eg common ground theory, egocentricity in language processing, language transfer), and will be able to critically evaluate the key scientific findings relating to them. You'll also appreciate the main experimental paradigms/techniques that are used in the field.   
 
 Performance Psychology
  
  Psychological factors are recognised as having an essential role in the attainment of success in all aspect of performance, especially in sport. In this class, issues relating to the psychology of elite performance, individual and group processes and the acquisition of complex motor skills will be examined. The aim of the topic stream is to provide you with an in-depth understanding of: 
   
   Psychology of elite performance 
   The relationships between anxiety and performance will be evaluated, and the ways elite performers cope with the pressure will be assessed 
   Individual and group processes in sport: An evaluation of leadership styles and group and team dynamics will be undertaken 
   Motor skill acquisition and performance: current theoretical issues in the development of skilled motor behaviours will be analysed 
   
     
 
 Health Psychology
  
  You'll be provided with a comprehensive grounding in the theories, methods and evidence base of health psychology. In addition, this class will provide opportunities for you to apply your knowledge to real world health problems. This combination of knowledge and practical application will enable you to make informed judgements about postgraduate study and training within the discipline. It'll also support any effort to gain employment within health related jobs, such as health promotion.   
 
 Neuropsychology of Ageing and Dementia
  
  This class will offer you the opportunity to acquire an in-depth understanding of the theories and empirical data that are relevant within the field of neuropsychology of ageing and dementia. 
  It'll cover the differences between normal and pathological decline in old age and will provide information on the neuropsychological profiles and pathologies which characterise different forms of dementia. 
  You'll learn to identify the features which can aid early diagnosis and differential diagnosis of the dementias (eg for Alzheimer's disease, Frontotemporal dementia, Vascular dementia and Parkinson’s disease dementia, Lewy body dementia). You'll become familiar with how different aspects of cognition are distributed within the brain and will be aware of the consequences of impairment. Different methodologies that are used for the study of the dementias will be explored (eg neuropsychological assessment, functional and structural neuroimaging) and you'll learn to critically evaluate the benefits and pitfalls of each method. 
     
  
 Study abroad
 Erasmus International Work Placement
  
  This class is an option which is available to a restricted number of students who'll apply to take part. It involves a placement with a European University partner working in a research team during the summer between years 3 and 4. Additional assessment is the completed during semester 1 of year 4. 
  
 