Course content 
 Year 1 
 Education 
 Understanding Education in the 21st Century
  
  This class introduces students to a large and rich seam of disciplinary knowledge. It is an introductory class of potential interest to all who want to understand more about Education. Some of the key content to be addressed in the module is around the following: 
   
   the field of study that is education: what it is and how we know that 
   the context of education: some contribution of political, historical and economic dimensions to curriculum, schooling, policy, globalisation 
   education achievement: some contributions of psychological, sociological and philosophical perspectives to topics such as learning, diversity, gender 
   
 
 Placement & Curriculum
  
  On this module, students from across disciplines work together to learn  about  children and the  communities in which they live; children's health and wellbeing; child protection; children's voice;  children's play and  play places. The notion  that the  health and wellbeing of children and young people is central to the advancement of society is a seminal theme in this module.   
  The placement experience has been designed to allow students to undertake a work placement with children and young people from 0 - 14 years.   Placements  will be  provided  in a range of settings outwith the mainstream classroom. 
  
 Economics 
 Introduction to Economics
  
  The purpose of this class is to provide you with a balanced introduction to economics which will be at once self-contained and lay the foundation for further study in economics and more generally. The work of the class will be based on a programme of systematic directed reading, supplemented by tutorials, using group projects and in-class short answer tests as cumulative assessment. 
 
 Year 2 
 Education 
 Learners & Learning
 
   This class provides students with an essential understanding of human learning processes and the needs of learners across the life-course. 
 
 Informal Education
 
   This module investigates philosophical and pedagogical interventions beyond the school curriculum in informal settings, with adults in particular. It'll also open up possibilities for informal education techniques and practices to be considered and adopted by a range of professions and to explore potential partnerships between informal education specialists and others. 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 2
  
  This is the core microeconomics class in second year. It aims to develop your understanding of: the concepts of consumer choice; the motives of the firm and profit maximisation; the market and its role in achieving equilibrium prices and quantities; and the implications of market power. It will introduce you to mathematical techniques commonplace in economics, giving you the ability to apply these in a wider economic context. 
     
 
 Macroeconomics 2
 
   The class builds upon the macroeconomic foundations established in the first year Economics class and both extends and deepens analysis. In particular this class will develop your ability to use key macroeconomic models and will also provide an introduction to the analysis of economic data. 
 
 Year 3 
 Education 
 History & Philosophy of Education
  
  This module will support students in developing their knowledge and understanding of the roots of some key educational ideas in history. These will be considered from a philosophical perspective. 
 
 Children & Childhood
  
  This module will focus on children and childhood in contexts other than formal education settings that will be explored elsewhere. The aim of this module is to introduce students to the concepts of child and childhood through a range representations. The class will draw on children in film, art and literature to explore representations of children and childhood and experiences of childhood. 
 
 Social Pedagogy with Adults
  
  This module is based on an understanding of the evolution of adult learning and the resultant principles that underline current practice and will illustrate how adult educators work and will also open up possibilities for adult education techniques and practices to be considered. It'll also explore potential partnerships between adult educators and others. 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 3
  
  Adam Smith's hidden hand - markets result in efficient outcomes - doesn't always work. We seek to understand why through the study of market power, externalities and public goods, and then go on to apply these ideas to issues of education, healthcare provision and crime and punishment. 
 
 Macroeconomics 3
 
   This class builds on the Macroeconomics you studied in second year by covering four topics in detail: (i) models of economic growth; (ii) the effects of macroeconomic policy in an open economy; (iii) the interrelationships between money growth, output, unemployment and inflation; and (iv) the implications of high government debt. 
 
 Year 4 
 Education 
 Dissertation
  
  The Dissertation in Education is designed to further students’ development of a questioning, self-evaluative and reflective approach in a major in-depth piece of work demanding independent, self-motivated study and the sustained application of professional research and enquiry skills. 
  The widest possible range of topics, types of project, modes of enquiry and of research techniques is encouraged. What projects have in common is the individual student’s ownership and control of the project and the expectation of high quality work. 
  
 
 Choose from the following:﻿
  
 Policy & Politics in Education
  
  This class will provide students with the opportunity to engage in debate about current issues in education through detailed exploration of the policy and political contexts. It will introduce students to frameworks for understanding how policy comes about and how it is inextricably linked with political issues. 
 
 Social Issues in Education
  
  This module will teach students about the responsibility of teachers for the education, health and well-being of all children, in the context of a complex and diverse society.   It will also address the needs of those who will work with children, young people and adults in a variety of education-related contexts through its focus on a range of key social issues and the relevant national legislative and policy framework. 
 
 Social Research Methods (10-credit module)
  
  This module prepares students for designing and completing a research project. It will equip students with the skills and knowledge required in planning and delivering a research project. 
  
 Economics 
 Compulsory classes
 Dissertation 
 
   The dissertation is an important part of the fourth year programme. Single Honours Economics BA students are required to submit a dissertation in Economics while Joint Honours BA students may submit a dissertation in Economics or in their other Honours subject. 
  
 Elective classes
 Microeconomics 4
  
  Game Theory and  Information Economics, the topics of this class, consider market failure  resulting from two different sources: individuals pursuing their own  self-interest at the  expense of others; and information asymmetry which alters  the way agents behave.  Methods to alleviate these market failures will also be  considered. 
 
 Macroeconomics 4
  
  This class aims to provide you with the required tools to understand current macroeconomic issues, such as the interactions between the banking sector and monetary policy or the policy responses to the global financial crisis.    Throughout the class, the analytical usefulness of the theoretical models taught is illustrated with real-world examples. 
 
 Introduction to Econometrics
  
  This class builds upon the empirical content of Macroeconomics 2 and further develops your ability to analyse economic data. In addition, this class lays the foundations for further study of econometrics at Honours level. 
 
 Economics of Firms & Industries 
  
  This class introduces you to different industry structures and studies the behaviour of firms within those structures.   The material builds on the study of the theory of the firm presented in Microeconomics 2 and provides a foundation for the study of industrial organisation at Honours level. 
 
 Industrial Economics
 
   This course investigates the actions that firms in an industry might take to preserve their profit in that industry, and the implications that this has for competition policy and regulation. We take an analytical approach to the issues which will be supported by examining case studies and current events. 
 
 Applied Econometrics
  
  In the third year econometrics class you’ll have learned about regression in both a cross-sectional data and time series data context. This class extends that knowledge in three ways. 
  First, for cross-sectional data, the class deals with regression techniques where the dependent variable may be restricted or limited in some way. In such cases, the regression model as taught in the third year class is not appropriate; this class develops models which are similar in spirit to the standard regression model, but can handle all of these cases. 
  A second purpose of Applied Econometrics is to develop regression methods which can be used when you have panel data - consisting of both cross-sectional and time-series dimensions. 
  Third, the class will build on the introduction to the econometrics of time series data developed in this class by developing two classes of models. 
 
 Financial Development & Economic Growth
  
  This class gives a balanced view of the role of finance in promoting long-run economic growth, but also booms and busts. The nature and role of financial intermediaries will be introduced, and, afterwards, formally addressed in a simple aggregate growth model. Empirical evidence will be examined, before turning to the specificities of micro-finance. The importance of financial globalisation will also be investigated. Finally, the rest of the class will be devoted to deciphering the causes and consequences of the current financial crisis. 
 
 Behavioural Economics
  
  Behavioural Economics offers alternative theories that merge psychological insights with economic theory and are based on experimental and other evidence, that attempt to provide a better explanation of real-world behaviour. 
  This class is concerned with exploring these new behavioural theories with the aim of providing you with an expanded toolkit with which to approach ‘real-world Economics’ that is based on the burgeoning Behavioural Economics literature that has emerged over the past two or three decades. 
  After studying this, you should be able to extend much of your previously-learned knowledge in Microeconomics in various directions that take into account more realistic ways of modelling how individuals behave. 
 
 Natural Resource, Environmental & Energy Economics
  
  The module provides you with an introduction to natural resource, environmental and energy economics and policy. It focuses on the contributions of economics to understanding environmental, energy and resource problems, their causes, and the design of effective public policies to counteract them. 
  
 