Course content 
 Year 1 
 History 
 History 1A
  
  This class focuses on the history of the British Isles from 1700 to 1914. It was a period of phenomenal change in terms of who ruled the country, the main economic activities, emerging cultural expression and attitudes and the growth of British power overseas on an unprecedented scale. 
  In the class we'll use the British Isles as a historical 'laboratory' to discuss key themes that have shaped the modern world. 
  We'll look at: 
   
   the formation of the British state 
   the ideas that were shaped by the Enlightenment, in which Scottish writers played an important part 
   why Britain industrialised and Ireland did not 
   the often dire social consequences of industrialisation 
   how and why Britain created the Empire 
   the growth of British overseas trade will be looked at 
   the impact of Britain on Asian, African and American societies 
   the ideological effects of the American War of Independence, the French Revolution and the 1798 rebellion in Ireland 
   the meaning of Victorian values in Scotland and the development of modern political parties and the growth of democracy 
   the roles of gender and class in shaping modern British and Irish society 
   This class will enable students to understand the origins of both modern British society and the beginnings of an increasingly integrated global community. In the tutorials, each meeting will involve the examination of a key document or two, as well as a discussion of that week's topic. 
 
 History 1B
  
  This class follows on from History 1A and takes the story up to the end of the 20th century. We'll look at: 
   
   the effects of World War I on Scottish society and why Ireland broke away from the United Kingdom 
   the growth of the Labour Party and the rise of socialism will be traced 
   the effects of the Great Depression of the 1930s on British society 
   the reasons why the British government formulated a policy of appeasement, to show how foreign policy and domestic policy were inextricably linked 
   the impact of World War II on British society 
   the demands that led to the creation of the Welfare State will be explored 
   the new international realities facing Britain in 1945 
   the beginnings of the Cold War, to show how effectively Britain adapted to the loss of Great Power status 
   post-war society and the cultural revolution of the "Swinging Sixties". We'll ask whether a generation gap emerged 
   the long slow march of women's rights 
   the impact of immigration, to show the ways in which British society was changing fundamentally 
   the collapse of the traditional industrial economy in the 1980s and changes in Scottish family life, to show how social norms were being overturned 
   the advent and effects of devolution in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
   
  Just as in the first semester History class, we will use carefully selected documents in tutorials to help us analyse each topic. 
  
 Journalism & Creative Writing 
 Journalism & Creative Writing 1A
  
  The class introduces key concepts in the theory and practice of creative writing. During the course of this semester we focus mainly on the exploration and production of short stories.   This module aims to: 
   
   introduce you to the basic skills and techniques involved in writing short fiction 
   develop good practice related to the professional presentation of creative work 
   encourage you to discuss creative work collaboratively and constructively 
   introduce you to the skills involved in reflecting critically on creative products and processes 
   
  You're introduced to core concepts in both journalism and creative writing and explore the connections between the two areas of writing. 
 
 Journalism & Creative Writing 1B
  
  This class introduces key concepts in the theory and practice of journalism. It focuses mainly on the examination and production of journalism as a form of storytelling. 
  You'll be introduced to the fundamental skills needed to write effective news and features and will have the opportunity to practise these in the workshops. 
 
 Year 2 
 History
 
 Choose three from this list﻿
  
 Scotland: Renaissance and Reformation
  
  This course will focus on the period from the final establishment of the territorial boundaries of the Scottish kingdom in James III’s reign through to the Union of Crowns in 1603. In covering the era of the Renaissance and Reformation in Scotland, as well as the regnal union of 1603, it will focus on the reigns of successive Stewart monarchs and their subsequent accession to the English and Irish thrones, thereby creating a British imperial monarchy. 
  Scotland’s contact with Europe and its strained relations with England form core themes but political history will be studied in the light of the social, religious, economic and cultural developments that lend early-modern Scotland its distinct identity, thereby examining issues such as trade and economic development, the impact of the Renaissance in Scotland, literacy and the spread of reforming ideas, the arts, education and issues of identity. 
 
 Disease & Society
  
  This class provides a broad introduction to the historical relationship between diseases and human societies in the early modern and modern periods. 
  It examines the core thesis that diseases and other health conditions have had dramatic impacts on history, shaping economic relations, political and social structures and cultural and religious beliefs.   However, it also explores the reverse of this, the thesis that human activities, ideas and behaviours have radically altered the diseases and conditions that afflict our societies over the last five hundred years. 
  The course is grouped around three themes: 
   
   infectious disease 
   chronic disease 
   society's responses to disease 
   
  Lectures in the first two sections focus on exploring the origins of key diseases/debilities, the ways in which social structures/behaviours have caused or abetted these conditions, and their impacts on society, economics, politics and culture. 
  In the final section, lectures focus more on the ways in which societies have sought to conceptualise, control and cure diseases. The key questions that students should be able to answer by the end is how have diseases and debilities shaped human societies, and how have human societies shaped diseases and debilities? 
 
 History of Scotland 1700-1832
  
  This course will explore Scotland’s political, economic, religious, intellectual and social development in the aftermath of the Union of 1707 through to 1832.   The benefits, disadvantages and tensions that arose from the process of becoming part of the British state will be explored through such issues as: 
   
   causes and impact of union 
   the significance of Jacobitism 
   the nature and consequence of agricultural and industrial change 
   Empire 
   the role of the Scottish Enlightenment. 
   
 
 Modern Europe
  
  This class examines some of the principal developments in international history of twentieth century Europe. It pays particular attention to: 
   
   the causes of the First World War 
   the impact of the war upon the international system 
   the rise of new powers within the international community after 1919 
   the causes of the Second World War 
   the Cold War and the forces driving European integration since 1945 
   the role of the USA and USSR in recent European history 
   In terms of geographical coverage the class will seek to balance consideration of Europe-wide developments with finer-focus treatment of French, Italian and German history. The class will introduce students to some of the main debates in the academic literature and encourage them to look at a range of relevant primary sources.
   
  
 Journalism & Creative Writing 
 Journalism 2
  
  How we gather news, how we write news and how we consume news is changing. The aim of this class is to introduce you to classic and modern newsgathering methods in the 21st century. That means you'll be combining the best of the old with the most relevant and effective of the new. 
  The foundation stone of journalism is news. That’s what drives newspapers, magazines, TV, radio and online content. So, we’ll be looking at what news is, where it comes from and how we go about gathering it ourselves. The next step is to write news. Therefore, we’ll spend some time examining how best to write news for print and online platforms. 
  The class is a careful mixture of studying journalism and doing journalism because understanding what you are doing and why you are doing it is just as important as learning how to do it. 
 
 Creative Writing 2
  
  You'll study contemporary literature from the perspective of the writer, analysing the craft of writing, as opposed to studying these texts in terms of their historical or cultural context, as you might be familiar with from English Studies classes. 
  The key objective of a creative writing seminar is to begin to understand the mechanics of how contemporary writers put their work together. Some of this analysis will reinforce and build upon lessons learned in first year relating to the basics of structure, tone, narrative, characterisation etc. 
  This class seeks to stretch you further, aiming to achieve a more sophisticated understanding of what makes a good story work. As well as working on short fiction, the class studies a novel and introduces some examples of flash fiction and short fiction. There's also a unit designed to introduce you to the basics of writing good contemporary poetry in free verse style and one that introduces the craft of dramatic writing. 
  The second hour of each class is generally a workshop, with elements of the texts being studied in the first hour used as a platform for writing exercises, group work and discussion in the second hour. Primarily, the second hour of the class focuses on you doing writing of your own. You'll also start to develop rewriting and editing skills.   
 
 Journalism and Creative Writing 2
  
  This class is an introduction to creative nonfiction. It looks at writing that relates to the self, such as autobiography, the diary, the memoir, the lyric essay and beyond. We focus on the way writers have written about themselves and their lives, and will explore how personal experience is transformed into literary and journalistic practice. 
  During the semester you'll develop your own ideas into written assessments. 
 
 Year 3 
 History 
 Oral History: Theory and Practice
  
  Please note that this is compulsory for students who wish to use oral history in their dissertation. 
  Oral history is a way of engaging with the past via the experiences and memories of those who were there. ‘Oral history’ is a multifaceted term that refers to the sources (interviews), the methodology (interviewing), theory (analysis), and products (of which there are many). 
  This new class aims to alert students to the possibilities of using oral history as a way of understanding the past. It will examine key concepts and methodologies in oral history and explore how oral history has helped to shape historical understanding. 
  This class also has an important practice-based focus – students taking the class will gain an opportunity to develop practical skills in oral history interviewing and analysis as well as to reflect critically on theory in relation to practice. They will also get an opportunity to explore the application and use of history in the public arena through engaging with work on oral history and public history. 
  Because of the practical nature of this class and the limited supply of equipment, numbers are capped at 25. 
 
 Religion behind the Iron Curtain
  
  This class will explore Church-State relations, together with the dilemmas faced by ordinary Christians and Communists, in a number of ‘satellite’ countries of East-Central Europe during half a century of Cold War.   Seminar topics will include: 
   
   the show trial of so-called ‘Vatican agents’ in Prague and Bratislava 
   a ‘miracle’ faked by the Secret Police 
   the case of a cardinal who took refuge in the US Embassy in Budapest 
   the election of a Polish Pope and the spirituality of the Polish Solidarity movement. 
   You should take this class if you want to engage imaginatively with both Communist and Catholic perspectives of the post-war period, read independently from a wide variety of primary sources and participate fully in seminar discussion and debate. 
 
 Disability in Modern Britain
  
  The aim of this class is for to gain an understanding of the key role that disability plays in the study of the historical past. 
  The class will explore the ways in which disability has been defined, treated and experienced. It will place developments in disability policy within wider social, cultural and political contexts. Students will engage with, and think critically about, primary sources ranging from official papers, newspaper articles, and oral testimonies, in addition to relevant secondary source material. 
  The use of oral testimonies in particular will help students to consider the lived experiences of disabled people and the ways in which society sought to define and treat disability.   
 
 Medicine & Warfare
  
  This class explores the role that health and medicine has played in the major wars of the twentieth century. In particular, it considers the vital contribution that medicine has made to manpower economy, discipline and morale. 
  Focusing predominantly on Britain, the USA and Europe, the class analyses the ways that different countries have responded to the medical issues posed by modern warfare in both military and civilian contexts. As such, it considers issues such as wartime disability, welfare provision, occupational health and psychiatry, and explores the role that military doctors, women and humanitarian organisations have played in shaping medical responses to war. 
  The key objective of this class is to place military-medical developments within their wider social, cultural and political contexts and to examine the impact of military health and medicine on the lived experience of war. 
 
 France at War
  
  The class begins with the traumatic episodes of the Franco-Prussian War and the Communes of 1871. By analysing the often problematic political and cultural consolidation of the Third Republic, this class will explore the ‘culture wars’ and the internal divisions that culminated in the Dreyfus Affair. After the humiliation of losing its status as Europe’s dominant power, France sought greatness in colonial expansion in Africa and Indochina, while seeking to consolidate national identity by transforming ‘peasants into Frenchmen’. 
  You'll explore the experiences of the First World War, assessing the strength of French unity in the face of the German enemy. The interwar clashes between fascism and the Popular Front will then be examined and how the First World War impacted upon French foreign policy and attitudes towards future war. 
  You'll spend three weeks exploring the enduring controversies of the Second World War, focusing upon the collapse, resistance, collaboration, and French involvement in the persecution of the Jews, as France faced its ‘hereditary enemy’ once again. 
  The class concludes with an analysis of the French withdrawal from Indochina and Algeria and an assessment of France’s position in the post-war global order. 
  A variety of sources will be explored throughout the class, including paintings, monuments, films, literary sources, newspaper reports, memoirs and archival documents.   
 
 Propaganda & War in the Twentieth Century
  
  This class examines means by which states conduct informal activities to promote their domestic and foreign objectives during wartime. In particular, it analyses the role of propaganda throughout the twentieth century, focusing on the use of modern mass communication and technology by states involved in conflicts. 
  The class is structured around a number of historical themes, which help shed light on the emergence of propaganda as an important means of modern warfare. Key themes analysed throughout the course include: 
   
   the First World War as the first ‘total war’ 
   the growth of international radio broadcasting 
   the creation of centralised propaganda machines in Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union 
   home-front propaganda during the Second World War 
   propaganda, disinformation and the Cold War 
   the United States and the experience of Vietnam 
   information, media coverage and the Gulf War 
   9/11 and the war on terrorism 
   During seminars, students will be exposed to relevant primary source material. Particular attention will be given to understanding the theory and practice of propaganda and analysing how technological developments have contributed to shaping modern information and mass persuasion.
   
 
 Historiography
  
  This class is compulsory for students who want to study history at Honours level.﻿ 
  This class will introduce students to the methods used by historians to reconstruct the past, exploring and analysing the techniques used by historians in doing primary research. The class is designed to demonstrate how students can use these techniques in their own work, particularly their 4th year/Honours dissertation. 
  Among the topics that will be covered are: 
   
   constructing bibliographies 
   using evidence 
   using academic conventions 
   constructing research plans 
   writing historical prose 
   The class will also introduce students to the subject of historiography – the history of history – and the ways in which our understanding and construction of history has evolved. The class is designed to promote independent learning and encourage students to reflect more deeply on the subject matter. 
 
 Communism in Practice: the Case of Czechoslovakia
  
  Czechoslovakia, the last post-war European country to fall behind the Iron Curtain, was exceptional in allying itself to the Soviet Union voluntarily and in bringing its own Communists to power more or less democratically. Confident at first that it would be able to pursue its own path to socialism, the Czechoslovak Communist Party soon became one of the most rigidly Stalinist of all the Soviet satellites. The same Party which, in the 1950s, held some of the most notorious show-trials and put up the largest statue of Stalin to be found anywhere in the world, became, in the 1960s, the author of 'Socialism with a Human Face', a package of attempted economic and political reforms explosive enough to end in the country’s invasion by most of its Warsaw Pact allies. 
  This class will seek to move beyond the stereotypes and oversimplifications of Communism passed down by Cold War rhetoric to explore the shifting nature of Communist thought, power politics and international relations in this most perplexing of times in the history of Central Europe. 
 
 Genocide in the 20th Century
  
  The objectives of this class include introducing students to recent examples of genocide and related mass atrocities, and writing and thinking about these cases in a critical and engaged manner through analysis of primary and secondary materials. 
  Students will be introduced to historical, sociological, anthropological, and legal perspectives related to the occurrence of genocide and related atrocity crimes. Using case studies from the 20th century, we'll discuss: 
   
   contemporary issues related to the labelling of cases 
   the evolution of international legal, diplomatic, economic and military measures to prevent, interdict and punish atrocity crimes 
   the phenomenon of genocide denial 
   the politics of commemoration 
   the lingering legacies of violence on individuals and communities in the post-genocide period 
   
  Case studies will include clear-cut (recognized in international humanitarian law) examples of genocide, including: 
   
   the Armenian genocide 
   the Holocaust in Nazi-occupied Europe 
   the 1994 Rwandan genocide 
   
  Less clear-cut examples will also be looked at, such as: 
   
   Canada’s Residential School System 
   Stalinist crimes in Soviet Russia 
   Khmer Rouge atrocities in Cambodia 
   the scorched earth policies in Guatemala 
   ethnic cleansing surrounding the Bosnian War. 
   
 
 Society and Politics in Colonial India: 1880s-1947
  
  This class will cover the political developments and social groups from the late-nineteenth century till the decolonisation of South Asia in 1947. 
  This is a key period in the social and political history of modern South Asia as it witnessed the growth of a mass-based anti-colonial struggle.   Simultaneously, the involvement of different social groups in this process led to the emergence of community and caste based identity politics.   Under pressure from demands for independence, the colonial state initiated a process of phased devolution of power, and decolonisation after the Second World War.   The class will compare these developments to raise questions about the 'modernity' of colonial society and polity.   The class will analyse how different social groups - such as the peasantry, the working class and tribal groups - participated in and shaped political movements in South Asia. 
  Students will also be encouraged to use the regional perspective of South Asian history to understand the different expressions of class, gender and ethnicity in non-Western societies. 
 
 Scotland’s Highland Problem
  
  Historiography had tended to isolate Highland history from Scottish political development during the late medieval and early modern periods.   This class will re-address this trend, emphasising the Highlands as an integral part of Scottish society, at the same time exploring the division within Scotland between the ‘barbaric’ Highlands and the ‘civil’ Lowlands. 
  Students will study the nature and structure of clan society and place Highland events within the wider context of national and British politics during the sixteenth century.   While relations between the Scottish crown and its Highland subjects is the key theme of this class, students will analyse the extent to which such relations changed through time, and why. 
  The class will also highlight divergent policies within clan society itself, a factor which warns against treating the Highlands as a homogenous whole, instead taking into consideration regional, local and personal biases.    
 
 Scottish Society since 1914
  
  The class provides a broad survey of Scottish social history since 1914. The aim of this class is to explore the nature and development of Scottish society in the twentieth century by assessing the impact of industrialisation and the problems associated with de-industrialisation, as well as the development of an urban society. 
  By the end, the successful student should have expanded their knowledge of contemporary Scottish history and have a good idea of the diversity of issues, techniques and arguments which historians have deployed in the study of twentieth-century Scotland. Among the themes to be covered are: 
   
   the extent to which Scotland had a recognisable culture and identity 
   the myths and realities of 'Red Clydeside' 
   the notion that Scotland was a more intensely patriarchal society than the rest of Britain 
   the idea that Scotland was an anti-immigrant, racist and religiously intolerant society 
   
  
 Journalism & Creative Writing 
 Journalism 3
  
  We examine the techniques and art of feature writing. This means building upon key aspects of the news writing class in year 2. It also means exploring why features are important in tabloid, broadsheet and digital forms: 
   
   identifying what elements make a good feature article 
   how features are constructed 
   what major skills are needed to write a good feature piece 
   
  The art of feature writing has been impacted by the use of digital technology, from Tweeting to major long-form article sites. We’ll look in the lectures and, particularly in the workshop activities, at how digital technology has shaped everything including how we actually use that technology to research and source stories. 
  The history of feature writing in magazine, newspaper and various online forms will be studied. The class will build towards showing the links that exist between shorter feature pieces (profiles, columns etc) and longer magazine articles. 
  By the end of the class, you'll understand: 
   
   the links that exist between news writing and feature writing 
   how to tell a story within a feature article 
   how to gather research with an eye to characterisation and narrative 
   how to structure articles 
   how to use creative fictional techniques without losing sight of strict journalistic best practice techniques 
   The class should also be able to spot what can take a long feature article into other mediums like full-length books and multi-media projects on other digital platforms.  
   
 
 Creative Writing 3
  
  Covering the technique and craft of dramatic writing, this class looks at writing for screen and for radio, and examines how these skills can be used in fiction. We discuss a range of sources including screenplays by Harold Pinter, as well as radio plays. 
  Starting with the scene, the weekly workshops allow you to work on structure, plot, characterisation, dialogue and non-linear structure, which you will use as the basis for assessed pieces, which can be either screen or radio plays, or fiction.   
 
 Journalism and Creative Writing 3
  
  The first half of this class focuses on research informed creative non-fiction pieces including the profile, the travel piece, the obituary and the hybrid narrative. Set texts and films include work by Joan Didion, David Foster Wallace and Susan Orleans and examines how these writers have used narrative to capture real life, people and events. 
  In semester 2 the focus switches to journalism. 
  You'll attend a series of lectures and workshops which focus on the connection between using ‘real-life’ gathered raw material for journalism-based and /or fictional projects. We'll explore the complex links between non-fiction and fiction, including: 
   
   How can you use fictional techniques in non-fiction projects? 
   How far can you stretch the ‘rules’ of journalism? 
   What strategies must you employ when gathering material for a non-fiction project which ensures most impact for the readers? 
   How can these projects be exploited to fullest effect without losing inherent integrity and worth? 
   
  You'll learn through case-studies how the authors have used real-life as a source for their work, whether it is long-form journalism, documentaries, reportage photography, or journalism-based Hollywood movies. 
  The class reading list includes: 
   
   novels 
   adventure narratives 
   travelogues 
   novelists using non-fiction forms for social justice ends 
   novelists using journalistic research-gathering means to add realism and a factual-edge to their fictional-work 
   
 
 Year 4 
 History 
 Compulsory classes
 Special subject classes (taught over both Semesters 1 & 2)
 The Scramble for the Middle East: Arab Nationalism, Zionism and European Colonial Powers, 1914-1939 
  
  The interwar years are central to any analysis of the decline of European colonial rule in the Middle East and the formation of nation states. It was in the 1920s and 1930s that British and French mandatory authorities faced the emergence of nationalist movements throughout the Arab world as well as the increasing competition and penetration of hostile forces. 
  Students will examine historical themes and events that are significant to the development of political and cultural identities in the Middle East. Through the analysis of primary sources, students will focus on: 
   
   the debate surrounding British and French colonial practices 
   the emergence of the Zionist movement and the creation of a Jewish home in Palestine 
   the radicalisation of Arab nationalism and its impact upon the relations between local political elites and European colonial powers 
   the increasing tension between Jewish and Arab communities in Palestine 
   the creation of the mandates in Palestine, Transjordan, Syria and Lebanon and the process that led to the independence of Egypt and Iraq 
   the challenge brought by German and Italian subversive activities to British and French strategic interests in the region 
   
 
 Twentieth-Century Czechoslovakia
  
  The class will explore major themes in twentieth-century European history: 
   
   the post-World War I settlement 
   the rise of fascism 
   the origins and course of the Second World War, Soviet expansion, the Cold War, the social and political revolutions of the 1960s and the waning of the Soviet Union in the 1980s and 1990s -- from the perspective of a central European country which was created in 1918, dissolved in 1993, and whose opinions were seldom taken into account by the Great Powers. 
   
  Students will obtain a solid grounding in the history of Czechoslovakia from its creation to its dissolution. The class should also offer a useful introduction to themes in twentieth-century European history more generally. 
  Independent reading will concentrate heavily on source material, enabling students to taste the excitement as well as the frustrations of historical research. By being encouraged to view European affairs from a Czech perspective while at the same time having special responsibility for one other European country, students will be led to consider the problems of historical bias and subjectivity, and should develop historical empathy as well as considerable sensitivity to the complexity of international affairs. 
 
 Rwanda: Peace, Conflict & the Politics
  
  The purpose of this special subject is to introduce students to the study of peace and conflict, broadly defined, and to encourage them to write and think about these subjects in a critical and engaged manner informed first and foremost by history-based discourse, but also borrowing from political science, anthropology, and related disciplines. 
  The module will focus on the case study of Rwanda, with individual classes proceeding chronologically. 
  The first semester will cover the pre-colonial period to the start of the second Hutu Republic in 1973, while the second semester will cover 1973 to present. 
  Throughout, students will analyse relevant primary and secondary sources to explore the benefits of applying a historical lens to understanding a nation whose recent history includes both periods of peace and political stability, and several manifestations of state-sanctioned violence, including colonialism, small-scale ethnic, regional, and political conflicts, civil war, genocide, and authoritarianism. 
  Students seeking careers in human rights advocacy, international law, diplomacy, and journalism will also find this course particularly relevant. 
 
 Plantation in Ulster
  
  This class will explore the plantations that took place in Ulster during the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. 
  Students will examine the emergence of the idea for plantation in Ireland, why Ulster was regarded as suitable for plantation, and the various endeavours by English and Scots to settle in the north of Ireland, whether by private enterprise or by the state. This will culminate in the official Plantation of Ulster, a 'British' project initiated by James VI and I in the early years of his reign as king of England, Ireland and Scotland. 
  Students will also look at a couple of cases studies of individuals who were involved in plantation, enabling a detailed study of the political, social, economic and confessional reasons why they chose to migrate to and settle in Ireland at this time. 
  
 Elective classes
 France at War, 1870-1962
  
  The class begins with the traumatic episodes of the Franco-Prussian War and the Communes of 1871. By analysing the often problematic political and cultural consolidation of the Third Republic, this class will explore the ‘culture wars’ and the internal divisions that culminated in the Dreyfus Affair. After the humiliation of losing its status as Europe’s dominant power, France sought greatness in colonial expansion in Africa and Indochina, while seeking to consolidate national identity by transforming ‘peasants into Frenchmen’. 
  You'll explore the experiences of the First World War, assessing the strength of French unity in the face of the German enemy. The interwar clashes between fascism and the Popular Front will then be examined and how the First World War impacted upon French foreign policy and attitudes towards future war. 
  You'll spend three weeks exploring the enduring controversies of the Second World War, focusing upon the collapse, resistance, collaboration, and French involvement in the persecution of the Jews, as France faced its ‘hereditary enemy’ once again. 
  The class concludes with an analysis of the French withdrawal from Indochina and Algeria and an assessment of France’s position in the post-war global order. 
  A variety of sources will be explored throughout the class, including paintings, monuments, films, literary sources, newspaper reports, memoirs and archival documents. 
 
 Medicine & Warfare in the Twentieth Century
  
  This class explores the role that health and medicine has played in the major wars of the twentieth century. In particular, it considers the vital contribution that medicine has made to manpower economy, discipline and morale. 
  Focusing predominantly on Britain, the USA and Europe, the class analyses the ways that different countries have responded to the medical issues posed by modern warfare in both military and civilian contexts. As such, it considers issues such as wartime disability, welfare provision, occupational health and psychiatry, and explores the role that military doctors, women and humanitarian organisations have played in shaping medical responses to war. 
  The key objective of this class is to place military-medical developments within their wider social, cultural and political contexts and to examine the impact of military health and medicine on the lived experience of war. 
 
 Religion behind the Iron Curtain
  
  This class will explore Church-State relations, together with the dilemmas faced by ordinary Christians and Communists, in a number of ‘satellite’ countries of East-Central Europe during half a century of Cold War.   Seminar topics will include: 
   
   the show trial of so-called ‘Vatican agents’ in Prague and Bratislava 
   a ‘miracle’ faked by the Secret Police 
   the case of a cardinal who took refuge in the US Embassy in Budapest 
   the election of a Polish Pope and the spirituality of the Polish Solidarity movement. 
   You should take this class if you want to engage imaginatively with both Communist and Catholic perspectives of the post-war period, read independently from a wide variety of primary sources and participate fully in seminar discussion and debate. 
 
 Scottish Society
  
  The class provides a broad survey of Scottish social history since 1914. 
  The aim of this class is to explore the nature and development of Scottish society (and place it in a wider context) and to examine dominant narratives of Scotland and Scots in the twentieth century. 
  By the end, the successful student should have expanded their knowledge of contemporary Scottish history and have a good idea of the diversity of issues, methodologies and arguments which historians have deployed in the study of twentieth-century Scotland.   Among the themes to be covered are: 
   
   gender relations (for example, analysis of the Scottish ‘hard man’ narrative) 
   religion (including sectarianism and secularisation) 
   health and deprivation 
   the arts and culture (including festivals, theatre, cinema and television) 
   industry (and de-industrialisation and its impacts) 
   Overall, this class will explore the extent to which Scotland had a recognisable national culture and identity and assess and deconstruct narratives of Scottish society since 1914. 
 
 Scotland’s Highland Problem
  
  Historiography had tended to isolate Highland history from Scottish political development during the late medieval and early modern periods.   This class will re-address this trend, emphasising the Highlands as an integral part of Scottish society, at the same time exploring the division within Scotland between the ‘barbaric’ Highlands and the ‘civil’ Lowlands. 
  Students will study the nature and structure of clan society and place Highland events within the wider context of national and British politics during the sixteenth century.   While relations between the Scottish crown and its Highland subjects is the key theme of this class, students will analyse the extent to which such relations changed through time, and why. 
  The class will also highlight divergent policies within clan society itself, a factor which warns against treating the Highlands as a homogenous whole, instead taking into consideration regional, local and personal biases.    
 
 Communism in Practice: the Case of Czechoslovakia
  
  Czechoslovakia, the last post-war European country to fall behind the Iron Curtain, was exceptional in allying itself to the Soviet Union voluntarily and in bringing its own Communists to power more or less democratically. Confident at first that it would be able to pursue its own path to socialism, the Czechoslovak Communist Party soon became one of the most rigidly Stalinist of all the Soviet satellites. The same Party which, in the 1950s, held some of the most notorious show-trials and put up the largest statue of Stalin to be found anywhere in the world, became, in the 1960s, the author of 'Socialism with a Human Face', a package of attempted economic and political reforms explosive enough to end in the country’s invasion by most of its Warsaw Pact allies. 
  This class will seek to move beyond the stereotypes and oversimplifications of Communism passed down by Cold War rhetoric to explore the shifting nature of Communist thought, power politics and international relations in this most perplexing of times in the history of Central Europe. 
 
 Genocide in the 20th Century
  
  The objectives of this class include introducing students to recent examples of genocide and related mass atrocities, and writing and thinking about these cases in a critical and engaged manner through analysis of primary and secondary materials. 
  Students will be introduced to historical, sociological, anthropological, and legal perspectives related to the occurrence of genocide and related atrocity crimes. Using case studies from the 20th century, we'll discuss: 
   
   contemporary issues related to the labelling of cases 
   the evolution of international legal, diplomatic, economic and military measures to prevent, interdict and punish atrocity crimes 
   the phenomenon of genocide denial 
   the politics of commemoration 
   the lingering legacies of violence on individuals and communities in the post-genocide period 
   
  Case studies will include clear-cut (recognized in international humanitarian law) examples of genocide, including: 
   
   the Armenian genocide 
   the Holocaust in Nazi-occupied Europe 
   the 1994 Rwandan genocide 
   
  Less clear-cut examples will also be looked at, such as: 
   
   Canada’s Residential School System 
   Stalinist crimes in Soviet Russia 
   Khmer Rouge atrocities in Cambodia 
   the scorched earth policies in Guatemala 
   ethnic cleansing surrounding the Bosnian War. 
   
 
 Society & Politics in Colonial India
  
  This class will cover the political developments and social groups from the late-nineteenth century till the decolonisation of South Asia in 1947. 
  This is a key period in the social and political history of modern South Asia as it witnessed the growth of a mass-based anti-colonial struggle.   Simultaneously, the involvement of different social groups in this process led to the emergence of community and caste based identity politics.   Under pressure from demands for independence, the colonial state initiated a process of phased devolution of power, and decolonisation after the Second World War.   The class will compare these developments to raise questions about the 'modernity' of colonial society and polity.   The class will analyse how different social groups - such as the peasantry, the working class and tribal groups - participated in and shaped political movements in South Asia. 
  Students will also be encouraged to use the regional perspective of South Asian history to understand the different expressions of class, gender and ethnicity in non-Western societies. 
  
 Journalism & Creative Writing
 
 These are Honours classes currently offered. Not all of these classes will necessarily run every year and you should check with Course Support which are available for study.
  
 Dissertation Journalism 
  
  The dissertation is 6000-8000 words long and provides an opportunity to undertake a short research project on an approved topic of your choice. You'll be allocated an individual supervisor who'll guide your research and read drafts of your dissertation. 
  Please consult the dissertation handbook on MyPlace for further information on the English, Journalism and Creative Writing dissertation options and requirements for entry to these classes. 
  The ‘special project’ journalism dissertation should consist of 6000 words of journalism and 2000 words of critical analysis/reflection. 
 
 Dissertation in Creative Writing
  
  The dissertation is 6000 words long and provides an opportunity to undertake a short research project on an approved topic of your choice. You'll be allocated an individual supervisor who'll guide your research and read drafts of your dissertation. 
  Please consult the dissertation handbook on MyPlace for further information on the English, Journalism and Creative Writing dissertation options and requirements for entry to these classes. 
  The Creative Writing dissertation has two components: 
   
   creative work of up to 6,000 words 
   a 2,000-word critical reflection 
   
 
 Journalism Portfolio
  
  This class is driven by the realities of journalism in Scotland, the UK and wider world, in the 21st century. 
  The media landscape is changing fast and this class aims to study, impart and practice skills, theories and approaches which will assist us in understanding journalism and becoming better journalists. Technology and journalism have gone hand in hand since the days of paper and pencil. 
  This class identifies and utilises the latest developments in our digital toolbox which include: 
   
   online databases 
   online sources 
   discussion boards 
   social networking sites 
   blogs 
   You'll study how best to use them in producing excellent journalism. Technology can help journalists create great journalism – but it should never overwhelm, control or unduly influence the story. It's only useful if it helps us be produce powerful and compelling work. So, we'll learn how to use classic newsgathering techniques (e.g. face-to-face interviewing) alongside exciting new approaches.
   
  Much superb journalism still exists in print of course. But increasingly, stories are also being published on a multi-platform basis allowing us to see, hear and read additional material which adds depth and width to the stories themselves. 
 
 Creative Writing Portfolio
  
  You'll develop your knowledge and understanding of advanced skills necessary to the creation of fiction and poetry. These will be developed via critical and analytical reflection on aspects of enjoyable published work by leading writers in these fields. 
  You'll undertake a series of writing tasks on a weekly basis designed to foster your ability to manipulate narrative and poetic structures and an understanding of the importance of editing and redrafting your work. You'll also develop a knowledge of some of the major thematic and formal issues present in current British and American fiction and poetry. 
  The course will be taught through a mixture of workshop, guided reading and practical tasks and is taught by published creative writers. 
 
 Media and Literary Publics
  
  This class looks at the development and significance of the various formations of media and literary publics. 
  We'll examine the cultivation of the literary public in the 17th century, alongside the development of particular literary forms, and will look at the development of political forms of public and its literary expression.   The class will look at literary production as a vital component in the shaping of the social environment and relations. 
  We'll also examine the extent to which an understanding of public allows us to critically evaluate such issues as cultural distinction, the marketing and branding of literary and media production, and the expansion of political and literary engagement. 
  Finally, the class will look at the manner in which alternative ideas of media public have been used to create innovative and radical types of media and literary production and consumption. 
 
 New Narratives
  
  The class will mainly focus on your own creative output be that fiction, creative non-fiction or poetry. 
  It will also look at what is possible using traditional and digital media and encourage you to disseminate their work in a number of ways. This could be creating audio recordings or digital 'trailers' of their work to be accessed through a podcast or on a dedicated YouTube channel. Technology used will all be readily accessible on a smartphone or a computer, such as Paper Camera, Hipstamatic, Voice Recorder, imovie, and social media sites such as Twitter and Facebook. 
  The class will also look at traditional literary magazines, online literary magazines and the emergence of magazines that use new technology such as Electric Literature. Culminating in a public reading, the emphasis will be on how to move beyond the university workshop and engage with the rapidly evolving publishing landscape. 
 
 The Journalism of War
  
  This class will examine the reporting which has emanated from major conflicts over the last century. 
  The starting point will be dispatches from the First World War. The class will end with recent reporting from Iraq and Afghanistan. The journalistic output will be in the form of published press reports, novels, travelogues, radio scripts, television broadcasts and online coverage. 
  The class will focus on the techniques used by the authors: 
   
   historical constraints 
   identify common threads through output through the decades 
   assessing the changing mission of reporters 
   evaluating the technological impact of the broadcast and recent digital eras 
   the various focus chosen by journalists in the last century – moving from the ‘general’ reporting to the ‘personal story’ 
   
  The style of output will be scrutinised, along with the changing needs of the audiences. The theoretical backdrop will focus on: 
   
   the shifting demand for conflict reporting as democratic societies developed in the last century 
   the changing nature of the backgrounds of the journalists themselves 
   the widening access to new technology 
   the move towards increasing risk in reporting from conflict zones globally 
   
 
 Ethical Issues in Journalism
  
  In reporting the news today journalists face an increasingly diverse range of ethical dilemmas. This can have a significant impact on the manner in which they report the news. 
  Ethical issues do not only occur in traditional, mainstream reporting. New challenges are being thrown up by the use of the internet as a newsgathering tool, a publishing forum and as a means of interacting with the audience. 
  This class examines ethical issues relating to truth and trust, taste and offence, privacy and intrusion and respecting people. It considers the procedures that journalists use to solve ethical dilemmas and systems that are used to curb media excesses, both in traditional media forms and online. 
  
 