Course content 
 Year 1 
 French 
 Year 1
  
  Students take two combined classes: French 1A (semester 1), French 1B (semester 2). These courses are mainly organised around a linguistic progression towards level B1 in the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. There is a regular input of cultural background which takes the form of three lectures in semester 1 and two in semester 2 covering the following topics: 
   
 
 The Making of Modern France 
 France in a Global Context 
 Understanding the French Republic 
 French Identities 
 Contemporary French Society   
 
   
  In addition, there is an introductory lecture in semester 2 entitled ‘What is translation about?’ 
  
 Human Resource Management 
 Managing People
 
   In recent years the task of managing employees has been made more challenging by rapid changes in the business environment. This class focuses on the contemporary and practical issues of how people are organised and managed in the workplace and examines theoretical perspectives which help our understanding of the complex relationship between the employer and employee in facilitating the organisation and production of goods and services. 
 
 Year 2  
 French
 
 Students take two language classes as in Year 1. The language courses are based on a series of classes.
  
 Le Monde du Travail
  
  Cultural focus:  time (35 hour week, RTT and ‘ponts’, paternity/maternity leave, …) & ‘human resources’ (hierarchical organisation, discrimination, unions, relocation,…) 
  Linguistic focus: the negation, asking questions, using pronouns. 
 
 La France et L'Europe 
  
  Cultural focus: the origins of the European ideal, Europe and the EU viewed from France. 
  Linguistic focus: subjunctive mood. 
 
 Immigration & Nationalit&eacute;
  
  Cultural focus: a historical view of immigration in France and a look at the specificity of the French ‘integration’ system. 
  Linguistic focus: the system of tenses in French (concentrating on past tenses). 
 
 Les Femmes en Politique 
  
  Cultural focus: a further look (after first year) at French politics, concentrating on topical issues. 
  Linguistic focus: modal verbs. 
 
 Les R&eacute;gions
  
  Cultural focus: decentralisation, importance of regions in France. 
  Linguistic focus: the passive voice. 
 
 L’&Eacute;conomie
  
  Cultural focus: the French economy (role of the state, …), marketing &agrave; la fran&ccedil;aise 
  Linguistic focus: equivalent of –ing in French. 
  In addition, students specialising in French take  the French  Culture and History 2 class. This class focuses on the Occupation and French Colonialism/Decolonisation. The historical context for each topic is first set, and documents from the two periods studied, before discussion moves on to the cultural domain, via analysis of the following texts and films: 
   
   Au Revoir les Enfants (film, Malle) 
   Stupeur et Tremblements (text, Nothomb) 
   L'&Eacute;tranger (text, Camus) 
   Le Samourai (film, Melville) 
   Anthology of historical texts relating to the Second World War 
   Anthology of historical texts relating to French Colonialism/Immigration 
   
  
 Human Resource Management 
 Work Psychology
 
   This class develops understanding of managing people from a psychological perspective through understanding behaviour, attitudes, motivation and wellbeing of people at work. Areas covered include what leads to positive employee work attitudes like job satisfaction, organisational commitment, and their outcomes in terms of work behaviour, such as job performance, withdrawal, absenteeism, turnover, fair treatment and trust. 
 
 Work Psychology for Human Resource Management
 
   This class looks at applying psychological theories explaining effectiveness and well-being of people at work to Human Resource Management as an approach to managing people and the employment relationships. Areas covered include organisational and individual decision-making relating to the recruitment and selection process, the impact of performance management on employee perceptions, team working, and the impact of leadership on attitudes and trust. 
 
 Year 3 
 French
 Students take two language classes (as in previous years). 
 L’Esclavage Moderne 
  
  Cultural focus: a historical review of slavery and a look at modern forms of slavery. 
  Linguistic focus: reinforcement work on subjunctive mood, passive voice and negative forms. 
 
 Les Nouvelles Fa&ccedil;ons de Consommer
  
  Cultural focus: the impact of consumerism on the environment. 
  Linguistic focus: adjectives and comparative, hypothesis, conditional mood. 
 
 Le Syst&egrave;me &Eacute;ducatif
  
  Cultural focus: a look at current issues in the French education system. 
  Linguistic focus: reported speech, imperative mood, a further look at pronouns. 
 
 L’Ann&eacute;e &agrave; l’&Eacute;tranger
  
  Cultural focus: practical module  aiming at preparing students for the year abroad. 
  There is also a French Studies 3 class: Freedom and Identity in France and the Francophone world. This class is based on the study of the following texts and films as examples of the treatment of the class’s twin themes: 
   
   Milou en mai  (film, Malle) 
   Poverty (various texts) 
   The Dreyfus Affair (various historical texts) 
   Monsieur Klein (film, Losey) 
   Rue des Boutiques Obscures  (text, Modiano) 
   National Identity in the Third Republic (various historical texts) 
   
  
 Human Resource Management 
 Work, Employment & Society
 
   This class critically explores changes in the nature of work, employment and society through investigating the extent to which current developments in the workplace can be seen to represent a fundamental shift in the nature of workplace regulation. It'll provide contrasting and complementary perspectives on workplace behaviour to those provided in year 2. 
 
 Employment Relations
 
   You'll be introduced to the British system of employment relations, and the general principles, processes and outcomes. It'll consider different theoretical approaches to the study of employment and industrial relations and then examine the role and objectives of trade unions, employers and the state, and their interactions in collective bargaining, employee participation and industrial conflict. 
 
 Year abroad 
 Year abroad
 
   This is the year abroad, spent either studying at a foreign university or working as a language assistant or on a work placement. This year is compulsory to gain entry into Honours.
   
 
 Year 4 
 French 
 French
  
  The language course is based on a series of thematic dossiers dealing with current issues in France and the Francophone world. The focus of the class is on reinforcing and developing key professional language skills, such as translation into English, translation into French, liaison interpreting, and 'expos&eacute;' (formal oral presentation). 
  Students in Joint Honours French will additionally have one or more French Studies 4 classes. Everyone will take the Core Class, Images of Women, which considers the changing portrayal of women over the centuries, using the following texts as the basis of discussion: 
   
   Madame Bovary (novel, Flaubert) 
   Fatale (novel, Manchette) 
   L’&eacute;v&eacute;nement (Ernaux, novel) 
   Women in the Paris Commune of 1871 (various historical documents) 
   
  Joint Honours students not writing a dissertation in French will take these two further classes: 
   
   The Occupation and its portrayal in French films 
   France since 1945 
   
  
 Human Resource Management 
 Advanced Organisational Behaviour
 
   This class draws on current themes in work and organisational psychology, and HRM understood from the perspective of micro-organisational behaviour theory and research. It's structured around the concepts of Reframing Organisations and, although the emphasis is on ‘micro’, or individual-level, approaches to organisational behaviour, ‘reframing’ takes into consideration more ‘macro’ or sociological and critical management approaches as well. 
 
 HRM & Employment Relations in Public Services
  
  The aim of the module is to provide you with a critical understanding of the context and content of ‘New Public Management’ and alternative public management reform strategies. There's particular reference to impacts on HRM and employment relations. 
  The module will enable you to compare how different countries’ reform trajectories have impacted on changes in HRM and employment relations. 
 
 Perspective on Work & Employment
 
   This module builds on the year 3 class, Work, Employment and Society, and explores the contribution of social theory to understandings of the contemporary conditions of work and organisations. 
 
 Human Resources in the Global Economy
 
   This class looks at HRM within a broader understanding of globalization and the international political economy. It places current themes in an international and comparative perspective by analysing and comparing different national ‘models of management’, and a range of employee response to them and, amongst other things, asks questions about the ways in which these management practices are disseminated by multinational companies (MNCs). 
  
 