Course content 
 Year 1 
 Structural Mechanics & Materials 1
 
   This class aims to provide a basic introduction to the mechanics of structures, engineering materials, and the basic principles of structural behaviour. 
 
 Civil Engineering Design Projects
 
   To provide an introduction to the design process for civil and structural engineering projects including an introduction to engineering drawing and AutoCad. You'll apply previous skills and knowledge learned to design, construct and test a model of a bridge. 
 
 Basic Mechanics & Fluid Statics
 
   The class introduces the essential principles of mechanics. It includes kinematics, dynamics and fluid statics. The aim is to lay the foundation for subsequent modules including hydraulics and water engineering. 
 
 Engineering Geology & Soil Mechanics
 
   This class aims to introduce key aspects for engineering geology for civil engineering and basic concepts of soil mechanics. 
 
 Civil Engineering & the Environment
 
   This class aims to introduce you to the structure, processes, technologies, practices and impacts of the construction industry and to the assessment and management of environmental risks. 
 
 Year 2 
 Structural Mechanics & Materials 2
 
   This class introduces you to advanced topics in structural engineering and limit state design. 
 
 Land Surveying & Mapping
 
   This class provides a basic understanding of the concepts and application of land surveying for civil engineering purposes and the use of maps and plans in civil engineering. 
 
 Hydraulics & Hydrology
 
   This class aims to develop understanding of applied hydraulics in civil engineering including simple examples of pipe and open channel flow and control structures and develop an understanding of the processes underlying catchment hydrology. 
 
 Soil Mechanics
 
   This class aims to aims to give an introduction to the governing principles of geotechnical engineering, in particular stress and settlement analysis and groundwater flow. 
 
 Chemistry & Materials Science
 
   This class aims to provide practical insights to fundamental chemistry and materials science and their roles in a wide range of civil and environmental engineering applications. 
 
 Year 3 
 Structural Engineering 1
 
   This class develops the theory and practice of analysis of statically indeterminate structures followed by an introduction to structural steelwork design, reinforced concrete design and the principles of structural timber design. 
 
 Geotechnical Engineering 1
 
   This class aims to aims to give an introduction to the governing principles of geotechnical design at the ultimate limit state. 
 
 Water Engineering 1
 
   This class aims to introduce common concepts, applications and design calculation methods used in water engineering and hydrology. 
 
 Construction Project Management
  
  Provides an introduction to: 
   
   the principles of management within construction organisations 
   the principles of project management within the construction industry 
   financial monitoring & control of projects and businesses within the construction industry 
   economic principles underlying decision making by firms in the construction industry 
   construction innovation and competitiveness 
   personal & professional development 
   
 
 Environmental Engineering
 
   This class aims to provide an introduction to environmental engineering including air, water, ground and subsurface systems as well as environmental impact assessment. 
 
 Engineering Mathematics
 
   This class aims to aims to give an introduction to differential and integral calculus, differential equations and statistics and probability and develop applications relevant to civil and environmental engineering. 
 
 Transport Engineering
 
   This class aims to introduce you to key principles, theory and techniques used in the analysis and design of transport systems. 
 
 Year 4 
 Structural Engineering 2
 
   This class aims to introduce you to the conceptual and detailed design of whole structures. You'll work in small groups to prepare the conceptual design of a multi storey building, followed by preparation of an individual coursework for the detailed design of typical elements including analysis and technical design. 
 
 Geotechnical Engineering 2
 
   This class aims to cover the design of geotechnical structures from shallow foundations to slopes and retaining walls, based on Eurocode 7. 
 
 Water Engineering 2
 
   This class aims to develop an understanding of a wide range of water engineering theory and processes including hydraulic structures, complex free surface flows, water treatment and wastewater treatment processes. 
 
 Prestressed Concrete, Stability & Steel Design
 
   The overall aim of the class is to provide strong skills in the structural behaviour, analysis and design of civil engineering structures. 
 
 Project Planning
 
   This class aims to provide you with experience of planning and managing small-scale projects. 
 
 Individual Project
 
   This class aims to undertake an individual research investigation, including a literature study, critical assessments and original research work, which is presented in the form of a dissertation and poster. 
  
 