Course content 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Social policy 
 Social Policy & Society in Contemporary Scotland
  
  This class is designed to introduce you to some of the major issues confronting Scottish society and to provide an accessible introduction to some of the key concerns of Social Policy.   It will examine a range of issues, including questions of poverty and inequality, social divisions, health, housing, education, and criminal justice. 
 
 Private Issues & Public Problems
  
  This class examines the different ways in which ‘private issues’ become recognised as ‘public problems’.   Using a number of different case studies, such as domestic violence, homelessness or poverty, it will look at the different ways in which social problems have been identified and at the different standpoints from which they can be viewed. 
  
 Economics 
 Introduction to Economics
  
  The purpose of this class is to provide you with a balanced introduction to economics which will be at once self-contained and lay the foundation for further study in economics and more generally. The work of the class will be based on a programme of systematic directed reading, supplemented by tutorials, using group projects and in-class short answer tests as cumulative assessment. 
 
 Year 2 
 Social policy 
 Scottish Social Policy since 1845
  
  This class explores some of the different ways in which social policy has evolved in Scotland in response to a variety of social problems since the introduction of the Scottish Poor Law Act in 1845. It covers all the main areas of social policy, including health, housing, education and poverty, and also explores the changing boundaries between individuals, families, communities, voluntary organisations, commercial welfare and state over the course of this period. 
 
 Key Concepts in Social Welfare
  
  This class explores some of the most important concepts in the academic study of Social Policy, including such concepts as equality, justice, need, happiness, poverty and wellbeing. It also examines a number of different ideological perspectives on these issues, such as liberalism, conservatism, socialism, social democracy, Marxism, feminism and the New Right. 
 
 The Making of Social Policy
  
  This class examines the ways in which social policies are ‘made’ at both a national and international level.   It examines the roles played by different actors, institutions and ideas.   It also looks at the ways in which evidence is used to inform policy-making, and at the ways in which we are all involved, as citizens, in the policy process.   These themes are explored with the aid of a series of case-studies, including health and education policies, and the development and implementation of equalities legislation. 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 2
  
  This is the core microeconomics class in second year. It aims to develop your understanding of: the concepts of consumer choice; the motives of the firm and profit maximisation; the market and its role in achieving equilibrium prices and quantities; and the implications of market power. It will introduce you to mathematical techniques commonplace in economics, giving you the ability to apply these in a wider economic context. 
     
 
 Macroeconomics 2
 
   The class builds upon the macroeconomic foundations established in the first year Economics class and both extends and deepens analysis. In particular this class will develop your ability to use key macroeconomic models and will also provide an introduction to the analysis of economic data. 
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Social policy
 Compulsory classes: 
 Research Skills in Social Policy
  
  This class will help you to develop your knowledge and understanding of some of the key methods used by researchers in the field of social policy.   It will introduce you to a number of different qualitative and quantitative methods, and to some of the basic principles of research design.   It will provide an essential foundation for your final-year dissertation.﻿ 
 
 Scottish Social Welfare in a UK Context
  
  This class examines the ways in which recent political developments have placed questions of social policy at the heart of debates over the future of the United Kingdom.   To what extent do the different parts of the UK face different social problems?   To what extent do different parts of the UK possess a different approach to the resolution of these issues?   How has the governance of social policy in different parts of the UK been affected by its current constitutional arrangements? 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 3
  
  Adam Smith's hidden hand - markets result in efficient outcomes - doesn't always work. We seek to understand why through the study of market power, externalities and public goods, and then go on to apply these ideas to issues of education, healthcare provision and crime and punishment. 
 
 Macroeconomics 3
 
   This class builds on the Macroeconomics you studied in second year by covering four topics in detail: (i) models of economic growth; (ii) the effects of macroeconomic policy in an open economy; (iii) the interrelationships between money growth, output, unemployment and inflation; and (iv) the implications of high government debt. 
 
 Year 4 
 Social policy
 
 Compulsory classes:
  
 The Welfare State in Comparative Perspective
  
  This class examines the development of welfare states as a global phenomenon.   It asks what we mean by the concept of a ‘welfare state’ and looks at the ways in which welfare states have developed in different countries.   It also explores some of the major differences between different types of welfare state, using the concept of ‘welfare r&eacute;gimes’. 
 
 Dissertation
  
  Many students find that the dissertation is the most fulfilling part of their degree. It will provide you with the opportunity to undertake your own in-depth investigation into a topic of your choice, and to develop skills as an independent researcher. 
  
 Economics 
 Dissertation 
 
   The dissertation is an important part of the fourth year programme. Single Honours Economics BA students are required to submit a dissertation in Economics while Joint Honours BA students may submit a dissertation in Economics or in their other Honours subject. 
  
 Elective classes
 Microeconomics 4
  
  Game Theory and  Information Economics, the topics of this class, consider market failure  resulting from two different sources: individuals pursuing their own  self-interest at the  expense of others; and information asymmetry which alters  the way agents behave.  Methods to alleviate these market failures will also be  considered. 
 
 Macroeconomics 4
  
  This class aims to provide you with the required tools to understand current macroeconomic issues, such as the interactions between the banking sector and monetary policy or the policy responses to the global financial crisis.    Throughout the class, the analytical usefulness of the theoretical models taught is illustrated with real-world examples. 
 
 Introduction to Econometrics
  
  This class builds upon the empirical content of Macroeconomics 2 and further develops your ability to analyse economic data. In addition, this class lays the foundations for further study of econometrics at Honours level. 
 
 Economics of Firms & Industries 
  
  This class introduces you to different industry structures and studies the behaviour of firms within those structures.   The material builds on the study of the theory of the firm presented in Microeconomics 2 and provides a foundation for the study of industrial organisation at Honours level. 
 
 Industrial Economics
 
   This course investigates the actions that firms in an industry might take to preserve their profit in that industry, and the implications that this has for competition policy and regulation. We take an analytical approach to the issues which will be supported by examining case studies and current events. 
 
 Applied Econometrics
  
  In the third year econometrics class you’ll have learned about regression in both a cross-sectional data and time series data context. This class extends that knowledge in three ways. 
  First, for cross-sectional data, the class deals with regression techniques where the dependent variable may be restricted or limited in some way. In such cases, the regression model as taught in the third year class is not appropriate; this class develops models which are similar in spirit to the standard regression model, but can handle all of these cases. 
  A second purpose of Applied Econometrics is to develop regression methods which can be used when you have panel data - consisting of both cross-sectional and time-series dimensions. 
  Third, the class will build on the introduction to the econometrics of time series data developed in this class by developing two classes of models. 
 
 Financial Development & Economic Growth
  
  This class gives a balanced view of the role of finance in promoting long-run economic growth, but also booms and busts. The nature and role of financial intermediaries will be introduced, and, afterwards, formally addressed in a simple aggregate growth model. Empirical evidence will be examined, before turning to the specificities of micro-finance. The importance of financial globalisation will also be investigated. Finally, the rest of the class will be devoted to deciphering the causes and consequences of the current financial crisis. 
 
 Behavioural Economics
  
  Behavioural Economics offers alternative theories that merge psychological insights with economic theory and are based on experimental and other evidence, that attempt to provide a better explanation of real-world behaviour. 
  This class is concerned with exploring these new behavioural theories with the aim of providing you with an expanded toolkit with which to approach ‘real-world Economics’ that is based on the burgeoning Behavioural Economics literature that has emerged over the past two or three decades. 
  After studying this, you should be able to extend much of your previously-learned knowledge in Microeconomics in various directions that take into account more realistic ways of modelling how individuals behave. 
 
 Natural Resource, Environmental & Energy Economics
  
  The module provides you with an introduction to natural resource, environmental and energy economics and policy. It focuses on the contributions of economics to understanding environmental, energy and resource problems, their causes, and the design of effective public policies to counteract them. 
  
 