Course content 
 Year 1 
 Psychology 
 Psychology 1a
  
  You'll take this class in semester 1 and are not expected to have any prior knowledge of psychology. It explores learning theory, developmental psychology, personality, biological psychology, and the scientific basis for psychology. 
 
 Psychology 1b
  
  This class is taught in semester 2 and covers sensation and perception, cognitive psychology, social psychology, abnormal psychology, and research methods. 
  
 Mathematics 
 Introduction to Calculus
 
   You'll  study the basic concepts and standard methods of mathematical notation and proof, polynomial equations and inequalities, sequences and series, functions, limits and continuity, differentiation and integration. 
 
 Applications of Calculus
  
  The fundamental concepts of calculus (differentiation and integration) presented in Applications of Calculus will be examined in more detail, extended to a larger class of functions by means of more sophisticated methods, including an introduction to complex numbers and variables, all demonstrated in application to practical problems including solving basic first and second-order differential equations.     
 
 Geometry & Algebra with Applications
  
  This class will introduce you to vectors and matrices, along with the idea of mathematical modelling through their application to real-world problems. 
 
 Statistics & Data Protection
  
  Some basic ideas and techniques of statistics will be presented while introducing some essential study skills, allowing you to develop and practice personal and technical skills eg self study, teamwork, analysing data, writing reports and making presentations. 
     
 
 Applications of Mathematics
  
  This class will introduce you to a range of interesting applications and explain the mathematics behind them. 
 
 Year 2 
 Psychology 
 Cognition & Neuropsychology
  
  This class reveals how our understanding of higher mental functions has been enhanced through: 
   
   theoretical and experimental studies of normal human cognition 
   neuropsychological studies of how cognitive functions may be damaged as a result of brain lesions 
   Topics covered include disorders of the perceptual system, memory and attention, and the role of the frontal lobes in planning, motivation, emotion, and personality. 
 
 Social & Health Psychology
  
  This class introduces social psychological theories and research that provide insights into why people believe what they believe, and why they behave the way they do. 
  Topics covered include attribution theory, aggression, prosocial behaviour, group influence, norms, conformity, obedience, and attitudes. 
  It ends with an introduction to health psychology, demonstrating how social psychological principles covered earlier in the class are applied to pressing, real-world health issues such as dietary behaviour, smoking/alcohol-use, and suicide. 
 
 Introduction to Research Design & Analysis
  
  You'll be introduced to the main features of measurement, research design, and statistical analysis in psychology. 
  Following a general introduction, the course presents fundamental concepts, issues, and debates in the field of research methods. 
  You'll also become familiarised with the conceptual basis for inferential statistical testing, and introduced to different inferential statistics. Finally, a brief introduction to qualitative research methods takes place. 
  
 Mathematics 
 Linear Algebra & Differential Equations
  
  This class will introduce you to the basic ideas of linear algebra, such as matrices and determinants, vector spaces, bases, eigenvalues and eigenvectors. You'll study various standard methods for solving ordinary differential equations and understand their relevance. 
 
 Advanced Calculus
  
  Basic ideas, techniques and results for calculus of two and three variables, along with differentiation and integration over curves, surfaces and volumes of both scalar and vector fields will be presented. 
 
 Applicable Analysis
  
  This class will give a rigorous treatment of convergence of sequences and infinite series of real numbers and of continuity, differentiability and integrability of functions of a real variable, and will illustrate the importance of these concepts in the analysis of problems arising in applications. 
 
 Probability & Statistical Inference
  
  Presentation of the basic concepts of probability theory and statistical inference will be covered to provide you with the tools to appropriately analyse a given data set and effectively communicate the results of such analysis. 
 
 Introduction to Newtonian Mechanics
  
  This class will develop your appreciation of the basic concepts of force, momentum and energy, and of Newton’s laws of motion and will equip you to apply these concepts to model physical systems, in particular the orbital motion of bodies. 
 
 Mathematical & Statistical Computing
  
  This class will introduce you to the R computing environment. It'll enable you to use R to import data and perform statistical tests, allow you to understand the concept of an algorithm and what makes a good algorithm and will equip you for implementing simple algorithms in R. 
 
 Year 3 
 Psychology 
 Research Methods in Psychology
  
  This class builds on year 2 and equips you with a broader, more advanced set of methodological and analytic skills. These skills are essential for carrying out the year 4 dissertation and for being able to read and understand articles published in academic journals. 
 
 Individual Differences
  
  You're encouraged to think scientifically about conceptual and practical issues related to the study of individual differences, with specific reference to intelligence and personality. You'll gain the chance to put this knowledge into practice by designing your own measurement instrument. 
 
 Cognition
  
  You'll be introduced to some of the core topics in cognitive psychology 
   
   perception and action, particularly how we perceive time and recognise faces 
   memory and learning, including models of episodic and working memory 
   language,  including word production, sentence comprehension, and discourse processing 
   thinking,  specifically problem solving, deductive reasoning and judgement and decision making 
   
 
 Development
  
  This class reviews the ways that children develop from infancy right through to the end of adolescence. Key theories are presented and used to explore the extent to which children’s development is continuous or stage-like and whether specific skills develop more quickly than others. Issues relating to infancy, ‘theory of mind’ (understanding others’ thoughts and beliefs), executive function (planning and monitoring abilities), language, and communication form the core themes in the class. 
 
 Psychobiology
  
  The purpose of this class is to provide the opportunity for you to learn the basic principles of brain function, and to encourage you to address the implications of this understanding for their own view of how behaviour is generated. It includes coverage of electrophysiology and psychopharmacology, neuroanatomy, research methods in neuroscience. There are focused sections relating to the visual system and the motor system. 
 
 Social Psychology
  
  This class allows you to consider current ideas and positions within social psychology. Four themes drive the class 
   
   attitudes and attitude change, covering the Theory of Planned Behaviour and the Health Belief Model 
   identity, with a focus on social, personal and group identities 
   prejudice, connecting both attitudes and identities, and covering a broad range of areas such as social representations, stereotyping, prejudice and conflict 
   epistemology, where consideration is given to the theory of knowledge, how social psychological knowledge is produced, and to what effect 
   
  
 Mathematics 
 Compulsory classes
 Complex Variables & Integral Transforms
  
  This class will introduce functions of a complex variable, define concepts such as continuity, differentiability, analyticity, line integration, singular points, etc. It'll examine some important properties of such functions, and consider some applications of them, eg conformal mappings, and the evaluation of real integrals using the Residue Theorem. It'll also introduce you to Fourier and Laplace transform methods for solving linear ordinary differential equations and convolution type integral equations. 
 
 Linear Algebra
  
  Here we'll introduce basic algebraic structures, with particular emphasis on those pertaining to finite dimensional linear spaces and deepen your understanding of linear mappings. We'll also provide an introduction to inner product spaces and bilinear forms. 
 
 Differential Equations
  
  We'll introduce you to analytical methods for solving ordinary and partial differential equations so you'll develop an understanding along with technical skills in this area. 
  
 Elective classes
 Applicable Analysis
  
  We'll introduce you to the basic theory and applications of metric spaces, normed vector spaces and Banach spaces, inner product spaces and Hilbert spaces, and bounded linear operators on normed linear spaces. 
 
 Mechanics of Rigid Bodies & Fluids
  
  This class will: 
   
   convey the generalisation of the mechanics of single-particle systems to many-particle systems 
   convey the central ideas of a continuum description of material behaviour and to understand relevant constraints 
   ground students in the basic principles governing three-dimensional motions of rigid bodies 
   convey how the ideas of continuum theory are applied to static and inviscid fluids. 
   
 
 Inference & Regression Modelling
  
  This class will: 
   
   review the concepts of probability distributions and how to work with these 
   present approaches to parameter estimation, focusing on maximum likelihood estimation, bootstrap estimation, and properties of estimators 
   present hypothesis testing procedures, including classical likelihood ratio tests and computer-based methods for testing parameter values, and goodness-of-fit tests. 
   introduce and provide understanding of the least squares multiple regression model, general linear model, transformations and variable selection procedures 
   present use of R functions for regression and interpretation of R output 
   
 
 Numerical Analysis
  
  This module will motivate the need for numerical algorithms to approximate the solution of problems that can't be solved with pen and paper. It'll develop your skills in performing detailed analysis of the performance of numerical methods and will continue to develop your skills in the implementation of numerical algorithms using R. 
 
 Stochastics & Financial Econometrics
  
  You'll  be introduced to the basic concepts of random phenomena evolving in time, from two complementary points of view: probabilistic modelling and data-driven analysis. Presentation of underlying ideas of simple stochastic processes, time series models, and the associated probability theory and statistical techniques will be covered. In addition to applications of the methods to financial and economic systems, including modelling, data analysis, and forecasting. 
 
 Year 4 
 Psychology 
 Dissertation in Psychology
  
  The dissertation is an opportunity for you to undertake an original piece of research, closely supervised by a single member of staff. Planning for the dissertation begins in year 3, and dissertations can be of such high standards that they are subsequently published in peer-reviewed academic journals. 
 
 Advanced Organisational Behaviour
  
  This class is offered by the Strathclyde Business School, and draws on current themes in Human Resource Management understood from the perspective of micro-organisational behaviour theory and research. Although the theoretical underpinning of the material covered is primarily about work and organisational issues at the level of individual behaviour in organisations, a contextual understanding of these issues is also encouraged. 
     
 
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice I & II
  
  If you take only one of these classes, you'll choose two of the following topics. 
  If you take both these classes, you're permitted to choose four: 
   
   Qualitative Methods 
   Social Development 
   Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology 
   Cognitive Impairment in Psychological Disorders 
   Practical Aspects of Memory 
   Artificial Intelligence 
   
     
     
  
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice I & II topics
 Qualitative Methods
  
  This class will offer you the opportunity to develop a deeper theoretical and practical understanding of advanced qualitative research methodologies. It aims to support and develop your understanding of the epistemological and theoretical assumptions behind various qualitative methodologies, specifically: 
   
   discourse analysis 
   conversation analysis 
   grounded theory 
   interpretative phenomenological analysis 
   narrative analysis.   
   
 
 Social Development
  
  Social development is a specialised, though broad, area of developmental psychology. It covers the development of all aspects of social behaviour, social influence and social reasoning. This class is intended for students who already have some grounding in developmental psychology and who wish to study advanced topics in depth. 
  Particular attention is paid to the interacting contributions of biological, cognitive and environmental factors. The lecture-based component of the course covers a range of core topics. These include: 
   
   infant social behaviour and understanding 
   attachment 
   aggression 
   gender 
   ethnicity and ethnic attitudes 
   social cognitive development 
   social development in adolescence 
   
 
 Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology
  
  This class will consider the historical and conceptual development of Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology, tracing its development from Freud’s work, through the work of the early Object Relations theorists, to modern approaches to Object Relations and Attachment theory. 
  It aims to critically assess the contribution that Psychoanalytic and Attachment theorists and practitioners can make to understanding personality. It promotes theoretical insight and reflective learning by engaging you with nomothetic studies of various aspects of psychoanalytic principles in practice such that links to discussions of theory are established. 
  In addition to lectures, you'll analyse personalities of two notable characters in history, critically assessing what unique insights into their natures psychoanalytic theory can add to those of approaches rooted in cognitive-behavioural theories. You'll then be further encouraged to identify the links between background literature and the complexity of whole personalities.   
 
 Cognitive Impairment in Psychological Disorders
  
  This class will explore the theoretical underpinnings of the short and long term memory systems (working, episodic, semantic) and related cognitive functions (eg executive functions), the methodological issues relating to their assessment, and how aspects of cognitive function have been implicated in specific clinical disorders. 
  Lectures which explore theoretical models of these memory aspects will be followed up with more specific and applied lectures and class discussions about the role of working memory and other executive functions in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, Williams syndrome, episodic memory in Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, and cognitive control, rumination and memory in depression.   
 
 Practical Aspects of Memory
  
  The focus of this class is to highlight the issue of generalisability of psychological theory with specific reference to memory. This approach encourages you to assess theories, developed in the laboratory, for their generalisability to real life applications, and, thereby, develops their critical analysis skills. 
  The two fields which are considered are forensic and clinical psychology. In the forensic domain the areas covered relate to the accuracy and completeness of eyewitness memory, and the assessment of lineup procedures and interview techniques used by the police, with practical recommendations made as to which situations and contexts certain procedures will be useful. In terms of clinical psychology, we will largely be focusing on the validity of repressed memories, with implications for ethically treating clients, and the important role of context in determining the veracity of a claim of recovered memories.   
 
 Artificial Intelligence
  
  This class will introduce you to some of the core topics in Artificial Intelligence, of both the traditional, symbol-manipulation and the more recent connectionist varieties. AI simulations in the areas of visual perception, language, memory and learning will be discussed to allow the exploration of key theoretical debates. 
  You'll develop an understanding of the relevance of artificial intelligence for psychology, and vice versa, and contrast the ‘analytic’ approach of experimental psychology with the ‘synthetic’ approach of AI.   
 
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practive III & IV (C8422/ C8424)
  
  If you take only one of these classes, you'll choose two of the following topics. 
  If you take both these classes, you're permitted to choose four: 
   
   Perception & Action 
   Forensic   
   Physiological PSychology 
   Psychology of Language 
   Performance Psychology 
   Health Psychology 
   Neuropsychology of Ageing & Dementia 
   
     
  
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice III & IV topics
 Perception & Action
  
  Perception and action is one of the major fields in contemporary cognitive psychology and neuropsychology. This class provides an opportunity for you to explore the field at an advanced level and achieve in-depth understanding of three key areas: 
   
   theoretical approaches to the problem of perception, paying particular attention to the contrasting perspectives and contemporary debate between ‘information processing’ versus ‘ecological’ theories of perception.   
   the ways in which perceptual information is used in the planning and control of action both in laboratory studies and in ‘real world’ activities such as tennis, cricket, athletics, high-diving and driving.   
   the role of cognitive maps and other representations of space in controlling perceptual activity. How cognitive representations of space are used to navigate around the external environment in children versus adults, and in blind versus sighted people. We also explore some of the spatial representations found in other species and explore how these can give rise to extraordinary spatial abilities. 
   
     
 
 Forensic
  
  This class will consider the historical and conceptual development of forensic psychology. 
  It'll build on your earlier work, specifically on your knowledge of the psychology of individual differences and, more generally, on their skills in applying research methods in psychology. The class aims to critically assess the contribution that forensic psychology researchers and practitioners can make to the criminal justice system. 
  It'll promote theoretical insight and reflective learning by engaging you with both nomothetic and idiographic studies of various aspects of the work of forensic psychologists such that links to discussions of theory are established. In addition to lectures, you'll analyse real examples of the forensic psychologist’s work, specifically by reporting on the psychological dynamics of a police interview, and by applying psychological theory to the analysis of a criminal personality.   
   
 
 Physiological Psychology
  
  The main purpose of this class is to provide a selective overview of the physiological and neural substrates of motivational states. The two motivational states that are covered in this stream are hunger and sexual motivation. To help you understand these two motivational states, a number of other topics have to be covered to provide the required background knowledge: 
   
   evolution 
   the development of   the nervous system including the roles of genes and the environment in development 
   euro-anatomy 
   threats and incentives 
   self-regulation   
   sexual differentiation 
   These topics will be new to you. You must learn new vocabulary and learn about basic physiological processes and neuro-anatomy. You'll also have to integrate this information to think about the psychological implications and consequences of these neural processes.  
   
 
 Psychology of Language
  
  The class will explore some of the key issues in psycholinguistic research such as pragmatic aspects of language use, language development, second language processing. You'll understand some of the key concepts in these areas (eg common ground theory, egocentricity in language processing, language transfer), and will be able to critically evaluate the key scientific findings relating to them. You'll also appreciate the main experimental paradigms/techniques that are used in the field.   
 
 Performance Psychology
  
  Psychological factors are recognised as having an essential role in the attainment of success in all aspect of performance, especially in sport. In this class, issues relating to the psychology of elite performance, individual and group processes and the acquisition of complex motor skills will be examined. The aim of the topic stream is to provide you with an in-depth understanding of: 
   
   psychology of elite performance 
   the relationships between anxiety and performance will be evaluated, and the ways elite performers cope with the pressure will be assessed 
   individual and group processes in sport: An evaluation of leadership styles and group and team dynamics will be undertaken 
   motor skill acquisition and performance: current theoretical issues in the development of skilled motor behaviours will be analysed 
   
     
 
 Health Psychology
  
  You'll be provided with a comprehensive grounding in the theories, methods and evidence base of health psychology. In addition, this class will provide opportunities for you to apply your knowledge to real world health problems. This combination of knowledge and practical application will enable you to make informed judgements about postgraduate study and training within the discipline. It'll also support any effort to gain employment within health related jobs, such as health promotion.   
 
 Neuropsychology of Ageing & Dementia
  
  This class will offer you the opportunity to acquire an in-depth understanding of the theories and empirical data that are relevant within the field of neuropsychology of ageing and dementia. 
  It'll cover the differences between normal and pathological decline in old age and will provide information on the neuropsychological profiles and pathologies which characterise different forms of dementia. 
  You'll learn to identify the features which can aid early diagnosis and differential diagnosis of the dementias (eg for Alzheimer's disease, Frontotemporal dementia, Vascular dementia and Parkinson’s disease dementia, Lewy body dementia). You'll become familiar with how different aspects of cognition are distributed within the brain and will be aware of the consequences of impairment. Different methodologies that are used for the study of the dementias will be explored (eg neuropsychological assessment, functional and structural neuroimaging) and you'll learn to critically evaluate the benefits and pitfalls of each method. 
     
  
 Study abroad
 Erasmus International Work Placement (elective)
  
  This class is an option which is available to a restricted number of students who'll apply to take part. It involves a placement with a European University partner working in a research team during the summer between years 3 and 4. Additional assessment is the completed during semester 1 of year 4. 
  
 Mathematics 
 Compulsory classes
 Communicating Mathematics & Statistics
  
  This class provides you with experience of the skills required to undertake project work, and to communicate the findings in written and oral form using a variety of sources, such as books, journals and the internet. 
  
 Elective classes﻿
 Modelling & Simulation with Applications to Financial Derivatives
  
  Here you'll get an introduction to ideas in mathematics and statistics that can be used to model real systems, with an emphasis on the valuation of financial derivatives. This module places equal emphasis on deterministic analysis (calculus, differential equations) and stochastic analysis (Brownian motion, birth and death processes). In both cases, in addition to theoretical analysis, appropriate computational algorithms are introduced. The first half of the class introduces general modelling and simulation tools, and the second half focuses on the specific application of valuing financial derivatives, including the celebrated Black-Scholes theory. 
 
 Applicable Analysis 3
  
  This class will present the main results in Functional Analysis, give an introduction to linear operators on Banach and Hilbert spaces and study applications to integral and differential equations. 
 
 Statistical Modelling & Analysis
  
  This class will provide you with a range of applied statistical techniques that can be used in professional life. 
 
 Fluids & Waves
  
  You'll be introduced to the theory of Newtonian fluids and its application to flow problems and the dynamics of waves on water and in other contexts. 
 
 Finite Element Methods for Boundary Value Problems & Approximation
  
  You'll be presented with the basic theory and practice of finite element methods and polynomial and piecewise polynomial approximation theory. 
 
 Applied Statistics in Society
  
  You'll be introduced to a range of modern statistical methods and practices used in industry, commerce and research, and will develop skills in your application and presentation. 
 
 Mathematical Biology & Marine Population Modelling
  
  Here you'll learn the application of mathematical models to a variety of problems in biology, medicine, and ecology. It'll show the application of ordinary differential equations to simple biological and medical problems, the use of mathematical modelling in biochemical reactions, the application of partial differential equations in describing spatial processes such as cancer growth and pattern formation in embryonic development, and the use of delay-differential equations in physiological processes. The marine population modelling element will introduce the use of difference models to represent population processes through applications to fisheries, and the use of coupled ODE system to represent ecosystems. Practical work will include example class case studies that will explore a real-world application of an ecosystem model. 
 
 Mathematical Introduction to Networks
  
  This class will demonstrate the central role network theory plays in mathematical modelling. It'll also show the intimate connection between linear algebra and graph theory and how to use this connection to develop a sound theoretical understanding of network theory. Finally, it'll apply this theory as a tool for revealing structure in networks. 
 
 Elasticity & Complex Materials
  
  We'll introduce you to general continuum theory with applications to Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids and elastic materials. 
 
 Optimisation: Theory & Practice
  
  We'll provide you with a basic mathematical understanding of modern approaches to optimization and the calculus of variations. 
 
 Statistical Mechanics
  
  Here you'll develop approaches to understanding complex or random systems in or out of equilibrium, based on ideas from statistical mechanics that incorporate familiar concepts and methods from neighbouring subjects like classical mechanics and probability and statistics. 
  You'll also be able to describe, through various examples and techniques, how macroscopic properties of systems arise from the ensemble action of many microscopic ingredients, and, specifically, how deterministic 'laws' may arise from basic randomness of a system with many variables or degrees of freedom. Fundamental examples include Brownian motion and the ideal gas. 
 
 Dynamical Models in Epidemiology
  
  We'll introduce mathematical models which arise in epidemiology and population dynamics, and help you develop techniques for analysing the qualitative behaviour of the associated dynamical systems. 
     
  
 