Course content 
 The Management Development Programme (MDP) is a core element of the undergraduate degree programme in the Strathclyde Business School. 
 The programme runs for the first three years of the BA degree. The entire class is driven by real business problems. The approach to learning is active problem-based, with students working in project teams. 
 The class aims to encourage integration of the knowledge and experience gained in Principal Subjects. Each year of the MDP focuses on different aspects of business and the content of MDP is constantly evolving and being updated and enhanced. 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Business Enterprise 
 Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice 
  
  This class is intended to give you a broad understanding of entrepreneurship, the arenas in which entrepreneurship is practiced, and the role of the entrepreneur in economy and society. The practical component will introduce you to entrepreneurship in the real world through engagement with entrepreneurs and the entrepreneurial process (e.g. guest lectures, cases, desk research, and group work). 
  
 Management 
 Managing in a Global Context
  
  This class will introduce you to the concept of the organisation and the manager’s role within it. It will further provide the grounding required to prepare you for the more complex and specialised subject matter to come both in general management and in international business.   
 
 Year 2 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
  
 Business Enterprise  
 Creativity & Innovation Management 
 
   This class aims to provide you with a rigorous understanding of creativity and innovation through an intensive blend of theoretical and experiential learning activities. You'll be strongly encouraged to submit your work to relevant business/innovation competitions (e.g. the Scottish Institute for Enterprise Young Innovators Competition and the New York City Big Idea Innovation Challenge). 
 
 New Venture Planning 
 
   This class is designed to provide a practical introduction to drawing up business plans and understanding how new ventures are managed and developed. It will not follow the traditional lecture pattern but will be highly interactive. You'll be involved in individual and group activities which will encourage creative thinking and “learning by doing” in addressing the real opportunities and challenges that face the first-time entrepreneur.﻿ 
     
  
 Elective classes
 Introduction to Business Start-Up
 
   Through this class, you're given the opportunity to appreciate the complexity of decision making in managing the initial and development stages of a start-up company. You have the opportunity to experience the complexity of the entrepreneurial process though a simulation. The overall aim of the class is to raise your awareness of the key concepts of new venture development, how small businesses operate and what influences success or failure. 
 
 Technology Entrepreneurship & Commercialisation
  
  This class aims for you to better appreciate management challenges of a complex, uncertain, and interdisciplinary high-tech business environment. This class attempts to bridge the gap between researchers, technologists and the mainstream customer and to provide engineers and scientists with a better understanding of what it takes to create and grow technology-based businesses. 
  
 Management 
 Organisational Analysis & Strategy
  
  This class will analyse contemporary management and organisation by examining the different ways of ‘doing business’ implied by different organisational forms. This approach to organisational analysis suggests that too often the study of management and organisation fails to recognise the importance of different structural forms in the evaluation of management and organisation. The argument to be developed throughout the class is that there is a need to engage in structural analyses of organisations and to understand better the relationship of organisations to the wider structures in which they are embedded and how this impacts upon both the strategic direction but also the day-to-day management of a business. 
 
 Understanding Change in Organisations
  
  This class recognises that change permeates all aspects of organisational life and that understanding change is crucial to effective management.   It'll familiarise students with the implications for change of a world that is increasingly globalised and internationalised, where public, private and 3rd sector organisations are often in continuous upheaval due to turbulent economies, to reforming imperatives, and radical new technologies. 
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Business Enterprise  
 Venture Management Strategy & Growth
 
   Having established a good understanding of the economic and social impact of entrepreneurship, opportunity identification, and starting and resourcing a new venture in previous modules, in this class you're presented with the challenges and opportunities of managing and growing the venture in a sustainable way. Through working with local businesses, you'll have the opportunity to assess the management practices of Scottish SMEs and consult them on their growth strategies.﻿ 
     
 
 Entrepreneurial Capital & Resources 
 
   This class provides an intense grounding in entrepreneurial capital. The need for both capability and commitment are stressed. After a grounding in the theoretical and empirical literature on entrepreneurial capital, you'll enhance your own entrepreneurial capital through a set of practical assignments. The class aims to build your awareness of different forms of entrepreneurial capital and build their effectiveness in entrepreneurial finance.﻿ 
     
  
 Management 
 Developing Theory into Practice
  
  In order to work effectively in organisations and manage complex, multi-faceted situations, managers need to develop their abilities to work with management theories to inform their practice and vice versa. Managers need to know what constitutes good or best practice, for which they need the skills of critical reflexivity. This means they can adapt their theories in use for specific situations. This class seeks to develop the skills of critical reflexivity so that students can become more aware of their own learning process and how to apply them in context. 
 
 Management Industry Placement
  
  This class provides students with the opportunity to gain first-hand experience working with business professionals, to develop practical and reflective skills in an industry context, and to build networks for possible future work and learning. It also provides the opportunity to apply theories studied in other classes to the analysis and interpretation of industry practices.   
 
 Contemporary Trends in Management Practice
  
  Management trends and fashions have been increasingly deployed in organisational practice and scrutinised in scholarly contexts over the last thirty years. Many of these practices, often referred to as ideas, tools and methods, have gained fashion status, waxing and waning in popularity over time. A large number of them have failed in practice largely due to unrealistic expectations and the complexity of organisational contexts in which they are adopted. This class is based upon student requests to learn more about contemporary management trends and the social and political factors which facilitate and undermine their application.   
 
 Year 4 
 Business Enterprise  
 Venture Management in Practice
 
   The class investigates the entrepreneurial and management issues associated with the growth of an established venture. It allows you to extend and build on your knowledge of entrepreneurship and small firms, by investigating internal and external issues faced by growth oriented ventures; as they seek to grow in a sustainable way through the application multiple capital resources. You'll have the opportunity to apply your knowledge and understanding in a real situation by undertaking an individual applied business development project, within an established entrepreneurial venture.  ﻿ 
     
 
 Research Methods 
 
   In Honours year, you should develop as an independent learner who can demonstrate the ability to conduct research independently within the Business Enterprise discipline. The module is supported with a Research Methods class, which aims to enhance your research skills.﻿ 
     
 
 International Entrepreneurship 
 
   This class is designed to highlight the growing importance of entrepreneurship in the international arena and to enable you to understand both the entry modes for international entrepreneurship and the typical obstacles faced by entrepreneurs and SMEs in moving into the international arena.   
     
 
 Issues & Trends in Entrepreneurship 
 
   This class will provide an opportunity to explore contemporary, emerging and cutting edge themes in entrepreneurship theory and practice. It will provide you with up-to-date and relevant insights into contemporary academic thinking on the entrepreneurship discipline, insights from practicing ‘master’ entrepreneurs and exposure to emerging trends that will shape the future entrepreneurial landscape. This course builds on the academic content of previous courses with in-depth exposure to contemporary academic theories and empirical studies on entrepreneurship.﻿ 
     
 
 Family Business Theory & Practice 
 
   The class examines the distinctive advantages and unique challenges that face family firms and builds an enhanced appreciation of the different perspectives of the various stakeholders associated with family business. It allows you to extend your knowledge of entrepreneurship and small firms by considering the specific dynamics of family ownership. The class will benefit from the input of guest speakers, including owners of family firms.﻿ 
     
  
 Management 
 Management, Enterprise & the Rise of the Global Economy
  
  This class embraces three principles of management: 
   
   business strategies and management practices might best be understood through reflection on the complex realities faced by enterprises in competitive arenas at home and abroad 
   firms can only be understood within the context of market dynamics and the economic, social, political and cultural forces bearing upon markets 
   companies and their contemporary situation can never be divorced from their past 
   
 
 Contemporary Issues in Management
  
  This class explores important concepts and debates centred on the working lives of managers. It'll draw on a range of conceptual ideas in organisational analysis to investigate numerous contentious issues that not only lie at the heart of academic debate but also confront managers as they go about their daily lives.   
 
 Dynamics of Organising
  
  This class will build on Understanding Change in Organisations by developing an advanced view of the processes of organising. The distinctively dynamic character of key theories will be framed in terms of the philosophical contrast between ‘becoming’ and ‘being’ ideas as described by Tsoukas & Chia (2002). Research methodologies that are appropriate for this dynamic approach, such as conversation/discourse analysis, longitudinal and real-time data collection, and issues of researcher reflexivity, will also be explored. Understanding of these dynamic theories of organising will be deepened through application to topics of practical managerial concern such as: strategising, institutional change, identity construction, communities of practice, innovation and creativity, socially constructed change, change leadership, sense making, complex responsive processes, emotions and aesthetics of change.   
 
 Strategy & Leadership 
  
  Taking a view that, in practice, strategy is something that people do rather than something organisations have, this class aims to develop understanding and insights into how current and aspiring business leaders can manage strategically. An experiential learning approach, based on exploring case examples through workshops, is adopted to: 
   
   surface insights into the complexities and challenges of being a strategic business leader 
   critically assess the scope and relative merits of different strategic management mechanisms and leadership approaches   
   encourage self-reflection and self-awareness 
   When you complete this class, you'll have an enhanced understanding of how individuals within an organisation can effectively lead and manage strategy in a complex and challenging world.
   
 
 Being an Ethical Manager
  
  Given the increased attention on business leaders and the perceived emphasis on corporate social responsibility, this class looks at ethical leadership by focusing on the nature and application of business ethics and contemporary leadership. It raises key ethical issues from both cultural and stakeholder perspectives and balances them with philosophical and pragmatic considerations. It'll provide you with a clear understanding of the dichotomy between philosophical idealism and the pragmatic considerations of ethical leadership and the challenges of ethical decision making.        
  
 