Course content 
 The Management Development Programme (MDP) is a core element of the undergraduate degree programme in the Strathclyde Business School. 
 The programme runs for the first three years of the BA degree. The entire class is driven by real business problems. The approach to learning is active problem-based, with students working in project teams. 
 The class aims to encourage integration of the knowledge and experience gained in Principal Subjects. Each year of the MDP focuses on different aspects of business and the content of MDP is constantly evolving and being updated and enhanced. 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Business Enterprise  
 Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice 
  
  This class is intended to give you a broad understanding of entrepreneurship, the arenas in which entrepreneurship is practiced, and the role of the entrepreneur in economy and society. The practical component will introduce you to entrepreneurship in the real world through engagement with entrepreneurs and the entrepreneurial process (e.g. guest lectures, cases, desk research, and group work). 
  
 Economics 
 Introduction to Economics
  
  The purpose of this class is to provide you with a balanced introduction to economics which will be at once self-contained and lay the foundation for further study in economics and more generally. The work of the class will be based on a programme of systematic directed reading, supplemented by tutorials, using group projects and in-class short answer tests as cumulative assessment. 
 
 Year 2 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
  
 Business Enterprise  
 Creativity & Innovation Management 
 
   This class aims to provide you with a rigorous understanding of creativity and innovation through an intensive blend of theoretical and experiential learning activities. You'll be strongly encouraged to submit your work to relevant business/innovation competitions (e.g. the Scottish Institute for Enterprise Young Innovators Competition and the New York City Big Idea Innovation Challenge). 
 
 New Venture Planning 
 
   This class is designed to provide a practical introduction to drawing up business plans and understanding how new ventures are managed and developed. It will not follow the traditional lecture pattern but will be highly interactive. You'll be involved in individual and group activities which will encourage creative thinking and “learning by doing” in addressing the real opportunities and challenges that face the first-time entrepreneur.﻿ 
     
  
 Elective classes
 Technology Entrepreneurship & Commercialisation
  
  This class aims for you to better appreciate management challenges of a complex, uncertain, and interdisciplinary high-tech business environment. This class attempts to bridge the gap between researchers, technologists and the mainstream customer and to provide engineers and scientists with a better understanding of what it takes to create and grow technology-based businesses. 
 
 Introduction to Business Start-Up
 
   Through this class, you're given the opportunity to appreciate the complexity of decision making in managing the initial and development stages of a start-up company. You have the opportunity to experience the complexity of the entrepreneurial process though a simulation. The overall aim of the class is to raise your awareness of the key concepts of new venture development, how small businesses operate and what influences success or failure. 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 2
  
  This is the core microeconomics class in second year. It aims to develop your understanding of: the concepts of consumer choice; the motives of the firm and profit maximisation; the market and its role in achieving equilibrium prices and quantities; and the implications of market power. It will introduce you to mathematical techniques commonplace in economics, giving you the ability to apply these in a wider economic context. 
     
 
 Macroeconomics 2
 
   The class builds upon the macroeconomic foundations established in the first year Economics class and both extends and deepens analysis. In particular this class will develop your ability to use key macroeconomic models and will also provide an introduction to the analysis of economic data. 
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Business Enterprise 
 Entrepreneurial Capital & Resources 
 
   This class provides an intense grounding in entrepreneurial capital. The need for both capability and commitment are stressed. After a grounding in the theoretical and empirical literature on entrepreneurial capital, you'll enhance your own entrepreneurial capital through a set of practical assignments. The class aims to build your awareness of different forms of entrepreneurial capital and build their effectiveness in entrepreneurial finance.﻿ 
     
 
 Venture Management Strategy & Growth
 
   Having established a good understanding of the economic and social impact of entrepreneurship, opportunity identification, and starting and resourcing a new venture in previous modules, in this class you're presented with the challenges and opportunities of managing and growing the venture in a sustainable way. Through working with local businesses, you'll have the opportunity to assess the management practices of Scottish SMEs and consult them on their growth strategies.﻿ 
     
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 3
  
  Adam Smith's hidden hand - markets result in efficient outcomes - doesn't always work. We seek to understand why through the study of market power, externalities and public goods, and then go on to apply these ideas to issues of education, healthcare provision and crime and punishment. 
 
 Macroeconomics 3
 
   This class builds on the Macroeconomics you studied in second year by covering four topics in detail: (i) models of economic growth; (ii) the effects of macroeconomic policy in an open economy; (iii) the interrelationships between money growth, output, unemployment and inflation; and (iv) the implications of high government debt. 
 
 Year 4 
 Business Enterprise 
 Venture Management in Practice
 
   The class investigates the entrepreneurial and management issues associated with the growth of an established venture. It allows you to extend and build on your knowledge of entrepreneurship and small firms, by investigating internal and external issues faced by growth oriented ventures; as they seek to grow in a sustainable way through the application multiple capital resources. You'll have the opportunity to apply your knowledge and understanding in a real situation by undertaking an individual applied business development project, within an established entrepreneurial venture.  ﻿ 
     
 
 International Entrepreneurship 
 
   This class is designed to highlight the growing importance of entrepreneurship in the international arena and to enable you to understand both the entry modes for international entrepreneurship and the typical obstacles faced by entrepreneurs and SMEs in moving into the international arena.   
     
 
 Issues & Trends in Entrepreneurship 
 
   This class will provide an opportunity to explore contemporary, emerging and cutting edge themes in entrepreneurship theory and practice. It will provide you with up-to-date and relevant insights into contemporary academic thinking on the entrepreneurship discipline, insights from practicing ‘master’ entrepreneurs and exposure to emerging trends that will shape the future entrepreneurial landscape. This course builds on the academic content of previous courses with in-depth exposure to contemporary academic theories and empirical studies on entrepreneurship.﻿ 
     
 
 Research Methods 
 
   In Honours year, you should develop as an independent learner who can demonstrate the ability to conduct research independently within the Business Enterprise discipline. The module is supported with a Research Methods class, which aims to enhance your research skills.﻿ 
     
 
 Family Business Theory & Practice 
 
   The class examines the distinctive advantages and unique challenges that face family firms and builds an enhanced appreciation of the different perspectives of the various stakeholders associated with family business. It allows you to extend your knowledge of entrepreneurship and small firms by considering the specific dynamics of family ownership. The class will benefit from the input of guest speakers, including owners of family firms.﻿ 
     
  
 Economics 
 Compulsory classes
 Dissertation 
 
   The dissertation is an important part of the fourth year programme. Single Honours Economics BA students are required to submit a dissertation in Economics while Joint Honours BA students may submit a dissertation in Economics or in their other Honours subject. 
  
 Elective classes
 Microeconomics 4
  
  Game Theory and  Information Economics, the topics of this class, consider market failure  resulting from two different sources: individuals pursuing their own  self-interest at the  expense of others; and information asymmetry which alters  the way agents behave.  Methods to alleviate these market failures will also be  considered. 
 
 Macroeconomics 4
  
  This class aims to provide you with the required tools to understand current macroeconomic issues, such as the interactions between the banking sector and monetary policy or the policy responses to the global financial crisis.    Throughout the class, the analytical usefulness of the theoretical models taught is illustrated with real-world examples. 
 
 Introduction to Econometrics
  
  This class builds upon the empirical content of Macroeconomics 2 and further develops your ability to analyse economic data. In addition, this class lays the foundations for further study of econometrics at Honours level. 
 
 Economics of Firms & Industries 
  
  This class introduces you to different industry structures and studies the behaviour of firms within those structures.   The material builds on the study of the theory of the firm presented in Microeconomics 2 and provides a foundation for the study of industrial organisation at Honours level. 
 
 Industrial Economics
 
   This course investigates the actions that firms in an industry might take to preserve their profit in that industry, and the implications that this has for competition policy and regulation. We take an analytical approach to the issues which will be supported by examining case studies and current events. 
 
 Applied Econometrics
  
  In the third year econometrics class you’ll have learned about regression in both a cross-sectional data and time series data context. This class extends that knowledge in three ways. 
  First, for cross-sectional data, the class deals with regression techniques where the dependent variable may be restricted or limited in some way. In such cases, the regression model as taught in the third year class is not appropriate; this class develops models which are similar in spirit to the standard regression model, but can handle all of these cases. 
  A second purpose of Applied Econometrics is to develop regression methods which can be used when you have panel data - consisting of both cross-sectional and time-series dimensions. 
  Third, the class will build on the introduction to the econometrics of time series data developed in this class by developing two classes of models. 
 
 Financial Development & Economic Growth
  
  This class gives a balanced view of the role of finance in promoting long-run economic growth, but also booms and busts. The nature and role of financial intermediaries will be introduced, and, afterwards, formally addressed in a simple aggregate growth model. Empirical evidence will be examined, before turning to the specificities of micro-finance. The importance of financial globalisation will also be investigated. Finally, the rest of the class will be devoted to deciphering the causes and consequences of the current financial crisis. 
 
 Behavioural Economics
  
  Behavioural Economics offers alternative theories that merge psychological insights with economic theory and are based on experimental and other evidence, that attempt to provide a better explanation of real-world behaviour. 
  This class is concerned with exploring these new behavioural theories with the aim of providing you with an expanded toolkit with which to approach ‘real-world Economics’ that is based on the burgeoning Behavioural Economics literature that has emerged over the past two or three decades. 
  After studying this, you should be able to extend much of your previously-learned knowledge in Microeconomics in various directions that take into account more realistic ways of modelling how individuals behave. 
 
 Natural Resource, Environmental & Energy Economics
  
  The module provides you with an introduction to natural resource, environmental and energy economics and policy. It focuses on the contributions of economics to understanding environmental, energy and resource problems, their causes, and the design of effective public policies to counteract them. 
  
 