Course content 
 Year 1 
 History 
 History 1A
  
  This class focuses on the history of the British Isles from 1700 to 1914. It was a period of phenomenal change in terms of who ruled the country, the main economic activities, emerging cultural expression and attitudes and the growth of British power overseas on an unprecedented scale. 
  In the class we'll use the British Isles as a historical 'laboratory' to discuss key themes that have shaped the modern world. 
  We'll look at: 
   
   the formation of the British state 
   the ideas that were shaped by the Enlightenment, in which Scottish writers played an important part 
   why Britain industrialised and Ireland did not 
   the often dire social consequences of industrialisation 
   how and why Britain created the Empire 
   the growth of British overseas trade will be looked at 
   the impact of Britain on Asian, African and American societies 
   the ideological effects of the American War of Independence, the French Revolution and the 1798 rebellion in Ireland 
   the meaning of Victorian values in Scotland and the development of modern political parties and the growth of democracy 
   the roles of gender and class in shaping modern British and Irish society 
   This class will enable students to understand the origins of both modern British society and the beginnings of an increasingly integrated global community. In the tutorials, each meeting will involve the examination of a key document or two, as well as a discussion of that week's topic. 
 
 History 1B
  
  This class follows on from History 1A and takes the story up to the end of the 20th century. We'll look at: 
   
   the effects of World War I on Scottish society and why Ireland broke away from the United Kingdom 
   the growth of the Labour Party and the rise of socialism will be traced 
   the effects of the Great Depression of the 1930s on British society 
   the reasons why the British government formulated a policy of appeasement, to show how foreign policy and domestic policy were inextricably linked 
   the impact of World War II on British society 
   the demands that led to the creation of the Welfare State will be explored 
   the new international realities facing Britain in 1945 
   the beginnings of the Cold War, to show how effectively Britain adapted to the loss of Great Power status 
   post-war society and the cultural revolution of the "Swinging Sixties". We'll ask whether a generation gap emerged 
   the long slow march of women's rights 
   the impact of immigration, to show the ways in which British society was changing fundamentally 
   the collapse of the traditional industrial economy in the 1980s and changes in Scottish family life, to show how social norms were being overturned 
   the advent and effects of devolution in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
   
  Just as in the first semester History class, we will use carefully selected documents in tutorials to help us analyse each topic. 
  
 Law 
 Criminal Law
  
  This course considers everything from the theory of why and how someone is held responsible for criminal actions, to many specific crimes, including murder, the less serious crimes of personal violence, crimes of dishonesty, breach of the peace and attempting to pervert the course of justice. 
 
 Law & Society
  
  This class engages with some challenging problems faced by law within contemporary society. It introduces students to some aspects of the social, political, and ethical conditions in which law operates. It deals with the interaction of law with justice, politics, morals and equality. The course will examine the role and challenges of law in times of social change. The course is structured around three key themes: 
   
   legal reasoning 
   law & politics 
   law & social change 
   
     
 
 Legal Methods
  
  The aims of this class are to: 
   
   provide students with a basic knowledge of the history, structure and institutions of the Scottish legal system 
   provide students with the skills required to find, interpret and analyse the law applicable in Scotland, from all their various sources 
   introduce students to competing conceptions of law 
   introduce students to legal reasoning 
   
 
 Voluntary Obligations: Contract & Promises
  
  While the most obvious aim of this course is to familiarise students with Scottish contract law and voluntary obligations, this aim may be divided into a number of sub-aims. They are as follows: 
   
   to place voluntary obligations within the general framework of Scots Law 
   to place the Scots law of voluntary obligations within its European context 
   to analyse and explain how contracts and promises are formed 
   to analyse and explain how voluntary obligations may be vitiated and on what grounds their validity may be challenged 
   to analyse and explain the substance of contracts and how the inclusion and exclusion of rights and liabilities is circumscribed by law 
   to analyse and explain how contracts break down or otherwise come to an end and the remedies available when they do 
   
 
 Public Law 1
  
  Following on from the introduction to the constitution – its key actors, institutions and their functions – in Public Law 1, students taking Public Law 2 will build upon that knowledge here: first by focusing on the ways in which legal (judicial review) and quasi-legal (tribunals, public inquiries, ombudsmen) bodies supervise the exercise of constitutional and administrative decision making; secondly, by a detailed analysis of the political and legal mechanisms which exist for the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms. As such, Public Law 2 is concerned with the abuse of power, and the ways and means by which power can be limited and held to account – whether that is the power of a golf club to suspend an unruly member, the power of a local authority to order the compulsory purchase of privately owned property, or the power of the Prime Minister to wage war. 
 
 Year 2 
 History
 
 Choose three from this list﻿
  
 Scotland: Renaissance and Reformation
  
  This course will focus on the period from the final establishment of the territorial boundaries of the Scottish kingdom in James III’s reign through to the Union of Crowns in 1603. In covering the era of the Renaissance and Reformation in Scotland, as well as the regnal union of 1603, it will focus on the reigns of successive Stewart monarchs and their subsequent accession to the English and Irish thrones, thereby creating a British imperial monarchy. 
  Scotland’s contact with Europe and its strained relations with England form core themes but political history will be studied in the light of the social, religious, economic and cultural developments that lend early-modern Scotland its distinct identity, thereby examining issues such as trade and economic development, the impact of the Renaissance in Scotland, literacy and the spread of reforming ideas, the arts, education and issues of identity. 
 
 Disease & Society
  
  This class provides a broad introduction to the historical relationship between diseases and human societies in the early modern and modern periods. 
  It examines the core thesis that diseases and other health conditions have had dramatic impacts on history, shaping economic relations, political and social structures and cultural and religious beliefs.   However, it also explores the reverse of this, the thesis that human activities, ideas and behaviours have radically altered the diseases and conditions that afflict our societies over the last five hundred years. 
  The course is grouped around three themes: 
   
   infectious disease 
   chronic disease 
   society's responses to disease 
   
  Lectures in the first two sections focus on exploring the origins of key diseases/debilities, the ways in which social structures/behaviours have caused or abetted these conditions, and their impacts on society, economics, politics and culture. 
  In the final section, lectures focus more on the ways in which societies have sought to conceptualise, control and cure diseases. The key questions that students should be able to answer by the end is how have diseases and debilities shaped human societies, and how have human societies shaped diseases and debilities? 
 
 History of Scotland 1700-1832
  
  This course will explore Scotland’s political, economic, religious, intellectual and social development in the aftermath of the Union of 1707 through to 1832.   The benefits, disadvantages and tensions that arose from the process of becoming part of the British state will be explored through such issues as: 
   
   causes and impact of union 
   the significance of Jacobitism 
   the nature and consequence of agricultural and industrial change 
   Empire 
   the role of the Scottish Enlightenment. 
   
 
 Modern Europe
  
  This class examines some of the principal developments in international history of twentieth century Europe. It pays particular attention to: 
   
   the causes of the First World War 
   the impact of the war upon the international system 
   the rise of new powers within the international community after 1919 
   the causes of the Second World War 
   the Cold War and the forces driving European integration since 1945 
   the role of the USA and USSR in recent European history 
   In terms of geographical coverage the class will seek to balance consideration of Europe-wide developments with finer-focus treatment of French, Italian and German history. The class will introduce students to some of the main debates in the academic literature and encourage them to look at a range of relevant primary sources.
   
  
 Law 
 Public Law 2 
  
  Following on from Public Law 1, Public Law 2 aims to consolidate knowledge and understanding of constitutional and administrative law. Students taking this class will require to have taken Public Law 1 in the first year. It'll build upon knowledge of the key concepts and institutions of the UK constitution. As a second year class, its rationale is to give students the opportunity to progress from an understanding of the constitution to an understanding of the role of the law in the constitutional control of public power. This course encourages students to adopt an evaluative and critical stance towards ongoing constitutional developments. The course will focus on control of administrative action, both by the judiciary and by ombudsmen. The protection of individual rights will be a key feature, focusing on judicial protection but also encompassing the role of human rights institutions in the UK and Scotland. The future control of public power will be discussed, including topical debates concerning constitutional reform in this area. 
 
 Domestic Relations
  
  Family law concerns the control which the law exerts over domestic relationships and families; it affects everyone to a greater or lesser degree. 
  Topics include: 
   
   the legal status of children, parental responsibilities and rights and the upbringing of children - including issues in adoption and fostering, local authority care and the Children's Hearing system 
   legal consequences of marriage/civil partnership 
   divorce - including what happens to the family and its financial consequences 
   unmarried domestic relations, opposite-sex and same-sex 
   
 
 Commercial Law
  
  Commercial law is a second year compulsory subject on the LLB (and LML) degree. The class provides students with an understanding of commercial law in a Scottish context. It partially meets the commercial law subject requirements and related skills outcomes of the Law Society of Scotland and the Faculty of Advocates (albeit that some of the commercial professional topics, eg sale of goods and insurance law, are dealt with by other courses). 
  Building on the knowledge acquired by students in first year, the general academic objective of the course is to examine the basic principles and rules concerning core aspects of commercial law, including the main principles of agency, partnership and company law, the law relating to various methods of payment (including consumer credit and bills of exchange) the rules governing the ways in which creditors can ‘secure’ repayment of a debt (eg through taking personal guarantees from third parties for repayment of the debt, or by establishing rights in security over debtor property); the basic principles of diligence; the consequences of both corporate and individual debtor inability to repay debts (corporate insolvency and personal bankruptcy respectively). 
  While the focus of the class is on ‘a black letter’ analysis of relevant statutory and common law in the broad commercial area, in order to aid understanding of relevant principles, the class also examines the policy rationales underlying the current law and recent and projected reforms in this area. 
 
 Involuntary Obligations: Delict & Unjustified Enrichment
  
  The design of this class is primarily aimed at enhancing students’ ability to read cases, deal with case law and apply the techniques of case-analysis and common law development. 
  The student will acquire an in-depth and up to date knowledge and understanding, from both a legal and a social perspective, of the rules of law governing involuntary obligations, that is to say the law of delict and the law of unjustified enrichment. 
  Students will acquire the ability to apply the rules of law to particular fact situations in order to provide definitive answers to the problems exposed in these situations. 
  Students will develop critical and reasoning skills, giving them the ability to make and present personal and informed judgments on the rules of law and their application within the domestic legal system. 
 
 Property Trusts & Succession
  
  The general rationale of this class is to provide students with a contemporary understanding of the law of property, trusts and succession in Scotland, and to meet Law Society of Scotland requirements in this subject-area. 
 
 EU Law 
  
  The EU law class focuses on the constitutional and institutional order of the EU as well as on the internal market. To this end, the class looks at the European integration process, the EU institutions, EU competences, the decision-making process within the EU, the principles underpinning the EU legal order and the principles governing the internal market. 
 
 Year 3 
 History 
 Oral History: Theory and Practice
  
  Please note that this is compulsory for students who wish to use oral history in their dissertation. 
  Oral history is a way of engaging with the past via the experiences and memories of those who were there. ‘Oral history’ is a multifaceted term that refers to the sources (interviews), the methodology (interviewing), theory (analysis), and products (of which there are many). 
  This new class aims to alert students to the possibilities of using oral history as a way of understanding the past. It will examine key concepts and methodologies in oral history and explore how oral history has helped to shape historical understanding. 
  This class also has an important practice-based focus – students taking the class will gain an opportunity to develop practical skills in oral history interviewing and analysis as well as to reflect critically on theory in relation to practice. They will also get an opportunity to explore the application and use of history in the public arena through engaging with work on oral history and public history. 
  Because of the practical nature of this class and the limited supply of equipment, numbers are capped at 25. 
 
 Religion behind the Iron Curtain
  
  This class will explore Church-State relations, together with the dilemmas faced by ordinary Christians and Communists, in a number of ‘satellite’ countries of East-Central Europe during half a century of Cold War.   Seminar topics will include: 
   
   the show trial of so-called ‘Vatican agents’ in Prague and Bratislava 
   a ‘miracle’ faked by the Secret Police 
   the case of a cardinal who took refuge in the US Embassy in Budapest 
   the election of a Polish Pope and the spirituality of the Polish Solidarity movement. 
   You should take this class if you want to engage imaginatively with both Communist and Catholic perspectives of the post-war period, read independently from a wide variety of primary sources and participate fully in seminar discussion and debate. 
 
 Disability in Modern Britain
  
  The aim of this class is for to gain an understanding of the key role that disability plays in the study of the historical past. 
  The class will explore the ways in which disability has been defined, treated and experienced. It will place developments in disability policy within wider social, cultural and political contexts. Students will engage with, and think critically about, primary sources ranging from official papers, newspaper articles, and oral testimonies, in addition to relevant secondary source material. 
  The use of oral testimonies in particular will help students to consider the lived experiences of disabled people and the ways in which society sought to define and treat disability.   
 
 Medicine & Warfare
  
  This class explores the role that health and medicine has played in the major wars of the twentieth century. In particular, it considers the vital contribution that medicine has made to manpower economy, discipline and morale. 
  Focusing predominantly on Britain, the USA and Europe, the class analyses the ways that different countries have responded to the medical issues posed by modern warfare in both military and civilian contexts. As such, it considers issues such as wartime disability, welfare provision, occupational health and psychiatry, and explores the role that military doctors, women and humanitarian organisations have played in shaping medical responses to war. 
  The key objective of this class is to place military-medical developments within their wider social, cultural and political contexts and to examine the impact of military health and medicine on the lived experience of war. 
 
 France at War
  
  The class begins with the traumatic episodes of the Franco-Prussian War and the Communes of 1871. By analysing the often problematic political and cultural consolidation of the Third Republic, this class will explore the ‘culture wars’ and the internal divisions that culminated in the Dreyfus Affair. After the humiliation of losing its status as Europe’s dominant power, France sought greatness in colonial expansion in Africa and Indochina, while seeking to consolidate national identity by transforming ‘peasants into Frenchmen’. 
  You'll explore the experiences of the First World War, assessing the strength of French unity in the face of the German enemy. The interwar clashes between fascism and the Popular Front will then be examined and how the First World War impacted upon French foreign policy and attitudes towards future war. 
  You'll spend three weeks exploring the enduring controversies of the Second World War, focusing upon the collapse, resistance, collaboration, and French involvement in the persecution of the Jews, as France faced its ‘hereditary enemy’ once again. 
  The class concludes with an analysis of the French withdrawal from Indochina and Algeria and an assessment of France’s position in the post-war global order. 
  A variety of sources will be explored throughout the class, including paintings, monuments, films, literary sources, newspaper reports, memoirs and archival documents.   
 
 Propaganda & War in the Twentieth Century
  
  This class examines means by which states conduct informal activities to promote their domestic and foreign objectives during wartime. In particular, it analyses the role of propaganda throughout the twentieth century, focusing on the use of modern mass communication and technology by states involved in conflicts. 
  The class is structured around a number of historical themes, which help shed light on the emergence of propaganda as an important means of modern warfare. Key themes analysed throughout the course include: 
   
   the First World War as the first ‘total war’ 
   the growth of international radio broadcasting 
   the creation of centralised propaganda machines in Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union 
   home-front propaganda during the Second World War 
   propaganda, disinformation and the Cold War 
   the United States and the experience of Vietnam 
   information, media coverage and the Gulf War 
   9/11 and the war on terrorism 
   During seminars, students will be exposed to relevant primary source material. Particular attention will be given to understanding the theory and practice of propaganda and analysing how technological developments have contributed to shaping modern information and mass persuasion.
   
 
 Historiography
  
  This class is compulsory for students who want to study history at Honours level.﻿ 
  This class will introduce students to the methods used by historians to reconstruct the past, exploring and analysing the techniques used by historians in doing primary research. The class is designed to demonstrate how students can use these techniques in their own work, particularly their 4th year/Honours dissertation. 
  Among the topics that will be covered are: 
   
   constructing bibliographies 
   using evidence 
   using academic conventions 
   constructing research plans 
   writing historical prose 
   The class will also introduce students to the subject of historiography – the history of history – and the ways in which our understanding and construction of history has evolved. The class is designed to promote independent learning and encourage students to reflect more deeply on the subject matter. 
 
 Communism in Practice: the Case of Czechoslovakia
  
  Czechoslovakia, the last post-war European country to fall behind the Iron Curtain, was exceptional in allying itself to the Soviet Union voluntarily and in bringing its own Communists to power more or less democratically. Confident at first that it would be able to pursue its own path to socialism, the Czechoslovak Communist Party soon became one of the most rigidly Stalinist of all the Soviet satellites. The same Party which, in the 1950s, held some of the most notorious show-trials and put up the largest statue of Stalin to be found anywhere in the world, became, in the 1960s, the author of 'Socialism with a Human Face', a package of attempted economic and political reforms explosive enough to end in the country’s invasion by most of its Warsaw Pact allies. 
  This class will seek to move beyond the stereotypes and oversimplifications of Communism passed down by Cold War rhetoric to explore the shifting nature of Communist thought, power politics and international relations in this most perplexing of times in the history of Central Europe. 
 
 Genocide in the 20th Century
  
  The objectives of this class include introducing students to recent examples of genocide and related mass atrocities, and writing and thinking about these cases in a critical and engaged manner through analysis of primary and secondary materials. 
  Students will be introduced to historical, sociological, anthropological, and legal perspectives related to the occurrence of genocide and related atrocity crimes. Using case studies from the 20th century, we'll discuss: 
   
   contemporary issues related to the labelling of cases 
   the evolution of international legal, diplomatic, economic and military measures to prevent, interdict and punish atrocity crimes 
   the phenomenon of genocide denial 
   the politics of commemoration 
   the lingering legacies of violence on individuals and communities in the post-genocide period 
   
  Case studies will include clear-cut (recognized in international humanitarian law) examples of genocide, including: 
   
   the Armenian genocide 
   the Holocaust in Nazi-occupied Europe 
   the 1994 Rwandan genocide 
   
  Less clear-cut examples will also be looked at, such as: 
   
   Canada’s Residential School System 
   Stalinist crimes in Soviet Russia 
   Khmer Rouge atrocities in Cambodia 
   the scorched earth policies in Guatemala 
   ethnic cleansing surrounding the Bosnian War. 
   
 
 Society and Politics in Colonial India: 1880s-1947
  
  This class will cover the political developments and social groups from the late-nineteenth century till the decolonisation of South Asia in 1947. 
  This is a key period in the social and political history of modern South Asia as it witnessed the growth of a mass-based anti-colonial struggle.   Simultaneously, the involvement of different social groups in this process led to the emergence of community and caste based identity politics.   Under pressure from demands for independence, the colonial state initiated a process of phased devolution of power, and decolonisation after the Second World War.   The class will compare these developments to raise questions about the 'modernity' of colonial society and polity.   The class will analyse how different social groups - such as the peasantry, the working class and tribal groups - participated in and shaped political movements in South Asia. 
  Students will also be encouraged to use the regional perspective of South Asian history to understand the different expressions of class, gender and ethnicity in non-Western societies. 
 
 Scotland’s Highland Problem
  
  Historiography had tended to isolate Highland history from Scottish political development during the late medieval and early modern periods.   This class will re-address this trend, emphasising the Highlands as an integral part of Scottish society, at the same time exploring the division within Scotland between the ‘barbaric’ Highlands and the ‘civil’ Lowlands. 
  Students will study the nature and structure of clan society and place Highland events within the wider context of national and British politics during the sixteenth century.   While relations between the Scottish crown and its Highland subjects is the key theme of this class, students will analyse the extent to which such relations changed through time, and why. 
  The class will also highlight divergent policies within clan society itself, a factor which warns against treating the Highlands as a homogenous whole, instead taking into consideration regional, local and personal biases.    
 
 Scottish Society since 1914
  
  The class provides a broad survey of Scottish social history since 1914. The aim of this class is to explore the nature and development of Scottish society in the twentieth century by assessing the impact of industrialisation and the problems associated with de-industrialisation, as well as the development of an urban society. 
  By the end, the successful student should have expanded their knowledge of contemporary Scottish history and have a good idea of the diversity of issues, techniques and arguments which historians have deployed in the study of twentieth-century Scotland. Among the themes to be covered are: 
   
   the extent to which Scotland had a recognisable culture and identity 
   the myths and realities of 'Red Clydeside' 
   the notion that Scotland was a more intensely patriarchal society than the rest of Britain 
   the idea that Scotland was an anti-immigrant, racist and religiously intolerant society 
   
  
 Law 
 Compulsory classes
 Evidence
  
  The main focus of the course is on providing an overview of how the handling and proving of facts works in law and how this interacts with the law of evidence. The emphasis is on understanding and application, rather than the learning of the specific details of legal rules. 
  The course has three general academic aims: 
   
   to introduce students to theoretical and practical issues relating to the use and proof of facts in the Scottish legal system 
   introduce students to the central concepts, rules and principles of the Scots law of Evidence 
   give students an understanding of the interrelationship between the theory, practice and law relating to the use and proof of facts in the Scottish legal system 
   
  
 Elective classes
 Law, Film & Popular Culture
 
   This class develops general concerns with the nature and function of law which are key elements in the wide-ranging theoretical, non-subject specific (or meta-law) classes taught within the Law School – Law and Society, Sociology of Law, Legal Theory and Criminology. 
 
 Legal Theory
  
  The main aim of this class is to introduce students to the major theoretical ideas and values of law, and to debates about those ideas and values, thereby enhancing their understanding of law in general. 
  The class explores relationships between law and morality, law and society and between law and power. In doing so, the course also explores what we mean by law, morality and power. The course requires students to work on their own and make an oral presentation and trains then in concise thinking. 
 
 Housing Law
  
  The aim of the class is to introduce the student to the law of landlord and tenant, and to concepts of housing need and market allocation of housing resources and the different ways in which such concepts are interpreted and operated in modern Britain.   The method of teaching and assessing the class is designed to enhance learning, academic and transferable skills. 
 
 International Private Law
  
  This class aims to provide students with an understanding of the problems inherent in situations involving a foreign element and the basic concepts and principles of Scots international private law. More particularly, attention will be given to the rules which establish when the Scottish court has jurisdiction in any case involving a foreign element. The class will also determine the applicable law in cases involving international elements heard before a Scottish court and the rules on recognition and enforcement of judgments in certain contexts. 
  The International private law rules in relation to: 
   
   contract 
   delict 
   marriage 
   divorce & nullity 
   parent & child 
   property 
   insolvency & succession 
   
  This class is not recommended for Erasmus exchange students. 
 
 Competition Law
  
  Most industrialised countries, and the European Union now have elaborate laws, rules and procedures for ensuring the maintenance of a competitive economy. This course looks at how the competition laws of the United Kingdom and the European Union affect how business operates in Britain. 
  If you're contemplating a career in business, or are simply a consumer, some knowledge of competition is useful. If you're a student of industrial economics, or of marketing, some knowledge of competition law is a wise precaution. Moreover there are considerably more job opportunities in this area, whether as an economic adviser, legal practitioner or in-house lawyer advising on effective compliance. 
 
 Discrimination Law
  
  Although we are all equal in the law, some are treated more equally than others. This module examines the nature of discrimination and some of the reasons for it, and the history of the law which tries to prohibit it and promote equality. The class looks in depth at the Equality Act 2010 and relevant case law. It covers the protected characteristics, direct and indirect discrimination, harassment, victimisation and disability discrimination, including the duty to make reasonable adjustments. As well as individual anti-discrimination law in employment and goods and services, the class examines preventive and pro-active measures, including positive action and the public equality duty and the arguments around their nature. 
  