Course content 
 Marketing 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Management 
 Managing in a Global Context
  
  This class will introduce you to the concept of the organisation and the manager’s role within it. It will further provide the grounding required to prepare you for the more complex and specialised subject matter to come both in general management and in international business.   
  
 Marketing 
 Introduction to Marketing
  
  Marketing is a key part of any successful business, and a good theoretical and practical knowledge of the subject will be of immense benefit to an aspiring manager or entrepreneur. In this class, you'll be exposed to concepts and ideas from economics, sociology, psychology, geography and other social sciences, all in the context of the competitive business environment. 
 
 Year 2 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
  
 Management 
 Organisational Analysis & Strategy
  
  This class will analyse contemporary management and organisation by examining the different ways of ‘doing business’ implied by different organisational forms. This approach to organisational analysis suggests that too often the study of management and organisation fails to recognise the importance of different structural forms in the evaluation of management and organisation. The argument to be developed throughout the class is that there is a need to engage in structural analyses of organisations and to understand better the relationship of organisations to the wider structures in which they are embedded and how this impacts upon both the strategic direction but also the day-to-day management of a business. 
 
 Understanding Change in Organisations
  
  This class recognises that change permeates all aspects of organisational life and that understanding change is crucial to effective management.   It'll familiarise students with the implications for change of a world that is increasingly globalised and internationalised, where public, private and 3rd sector organisations are often in continuous upheaval due to turbulent economies, to reforming imperatives, and radical new technologies. 
  
 Marketing 
 Semester 1
 Understanding Consumers & Markets
  
  Many of the fundamental concepts of marketing are based on an ability to understand consumers and the marketing concept can be implemented more effectively when adequate information about the market and potential consumer behaviour is available. Marketing Research and customer information provide a critical input to the planning and development of a company's marketing strategy in relation to marketing communications, strategic marketing and branding. 
  
 Semester 2
 Services & Retail Marketing
  
  At the heart of this class is the recognition that services present unique challenges, and that building customer relationships through quality service is fundamental to marketing success in every organisation. Over the past decade the retail sector has been one of the most dynamic areas in business. The retail sector also provides a very clear indication of the overall health and robustness of the economy. The rise or fall of the individual’s disposable income is very quickly reflected in terms of expenditure on items. In this respect, the retail sector acts as the weather vane for the economy. 
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Management 
 Developing Theory into Practice
  
  In order to work effectively in organisations and manage complex, multi-faceted situations, managers need to develop their abilities to work with management theories to inform their practice and vice versa. Managers need to know what constitutes good or best practice, for which they need the skills of critical reflexivity. This means they can adapt their theories in use for specific situations. This class seeks to develop the skills of critical reflexivity so that students can become more aware of their own learning process and how to apply them in context. 
 
 Management Industry Placement
  
  This class provides students with the opportunity to gain first-hand experience working with business professionals, to develop practical and reflective skills in an industry context, and to build networks for possible future work and learning. It also provides the opportunity to apply theories studied in other classes to the analysis and interpretation of industry practices.   
 
 Contemporary Trends in Management Practice
  
  Management trends and fashions have been increasingly deployed in organisational practice and scrutinised in scholarly contexts over the last thirty years. Many of these practices, often referred to as ideas, tools and methods, have gained fashion status, waxing and waning in popularity over time. A large number of them have failed in practice largely due to unrealistic expectations and the complexity of organisational contexts in which they are adopted. This class is based upon student requests to learn more about contemporary management trends and the social and political factors which facilitate and undermine their application.   
  
 Marketing 
 Semester 1
 Marketing Communications
  
  This module will explore relevant marketing communications theory, consider the role and purpose of marketing communications, critically review the different ways in which organisations can communicate (the marketing communications mix) and consider how marketing communication tools are used in practice. The module will also consider the need for Integrated Marketing Communications and identify those factors that impact upon the selection of an effective marketing communications mix. 
 
 Essentials of International Marketing
  
  This class aims to develop knowledge of international marketing theory and practice. The increased scope, risk and complexity faced by the international marketer is due to the increased level of uncertainty from operating in diverse and less understood environments. Emphasis is placed on the identification of challenges presented by international marketing to equip students to deal with differences, opportunities and threats emerging from diverse economic, demographic, political/legal, cultural, technical and competitive environments. 
  
 Semester 2
 Strategic Marketing
  
  The mission of this class is to provide students with a clear understanding of how to formulate business strategies using marketing concepts and theories. The course will review the tools necessary to analyse business cases, particularly looking at companies that are in the forefront of business today. It also provides an overview of the marketing plan and attention will be on the implications for planning and strategy development. 
 
 Management of Sales Operations
  
  A key aspect of the class is to evaluate selling strategies that can improve the productivity and effectiveness of sales operations via organisational structure, territory control and customer planning and setting sales targets. In addition, we’ll evaluate sales performance in terms of the behaviour and characteristics of salespeople and their interaction with buyers. 
 
 Year 4 
 Management 
 Contemporary Issues in Management
  
  This class explores important concepts and debates centred on the working lives of managers. It'll draw on a range of conceptual ideas in organisational analysis to investigate numerous contentious issues that not only lie at the heart of academic debate but also confront managers as they go about their daily lives.   
 
 Dynamics of Organising
  
  This class will build on Understanding Change in Organisations by developing an advanced view of the processes of organising. The distinctively dynamic character of key theories will be framed in terms of the philosophical contrast between ‘becoming’ and ‘being’ ideas as described by Tsoukas & Chia (2002). Research methodologies that are appropriate for this dynamic approach, such as conversation/discourse analysis, longitudinal and real-time data collection, and issues of researcher reflexivity, will also be explored. Understanding of these dynamic theories of organising will be deepened through application to topics of practical managerial concern such as: strategising, institutional change, identity construction, communities of practice, innovation and creativity, socially constructed change, change leadership, sense making, complex responsive processes, emotions and aesthetics of change.   
 
 Management, Enterprise & the Rise of the Global Economy
  
  This class embraces three principles of management: 
   
   business strategies and management practices might best be understood through reflection on the complex realities faced by enterprises in competitive arenas at home and abroad 
   firms can only be understood within the context of market dynamics and the economic, social, political and cultural forces bearing upon markets 
   companies and their contemporary situation can never be divorced from their past 
   
 
 Strategy & Leadership 
  
  Taking a view that, in practice, strategy is something that people do rather than something organisations have, this class aims to develop understanding and insights into how current and aspiring business leaders can manage strategically. An experiential learning approach, based on exploring case examples through workshops, is adopted to: 
   
   surface insights into the complexities and challenges of being a strategic business leader 
   critically assess the scope and relative merits of different strategic management mechanisms and leadership approaches   
   encourage self-reflection and self-awareness 
   When you complete this class, you'll have an enhanced understanding of how individuals within an organisation can effectively lead and manage strategy in a complex and challenging world.
   
 
 Being an Ethical Manager
  
  Given the increased attention on business leaders and the perceived emphasis on corporate social responsibility, this class looks at ethical leadership by focusing on the nature and application of business ethics and contemporary leadership. It raises key ethical issues from both cultural and stakeholder perspectives and balances them with philosophical and pragmatic considerations. It'll provide you with a clear understanding of the dichotomy between philosophical idealism and the pragmatic considerations of ethical leadership and the challenges of ethical decision making.        
 
 Brand Management 
  
  The importance of brands raises significant questions of how to develop brand equity and how to communicate a branding strategy of differentiation, value and identification. The role of the Brand Manager is reviewed along with formulating the necessary communication strategies to build brand equity and secure market share. 
  More recent approaches in this vein suggest that the traditional Brand Management approach is all too limited, leaving many questions unanswered. Consequently more recent approaches address the co-construction of brand value, through viral branding, using social media, co-branding and brand extensions. In this respect, the principles of branding are now being applied beyond simply new product development, to such strategies as places, communities and countries. 
  Other key strategies that may be discussed include, luxury branding, nation branding, business-to-business branding and corporate brands. 
 
 Social Marketing 
  
  This course aims to build on your knowledge of traditional commercial-oriented Marketing, by examining applications of Marketing in a social context. Each year millions of pounds are spent world-wide to combat health and social problems such as HIV/AIDS, smoking, drug and alcohol abuse and rising obesity levels. At the same time excessive consumptions burdens society with building landfills and increasing pollution. Meanwhile there are still people who consume ‘too little’ and who suffer from hunger. 
  The class considers recent research in a variety of Social Marketing contexts and material is continuously updated to ensure that students gain an understanding of the most relevant and critical Social Marketing trends. 
 
 Dissertation 
 
   The dissertation is an important part of the fourth year programme. Single honours students are required to submit a dissertation in Marketing while joint Honours students can submit a dissertation in Marketing or in their other Honours subject. 
  
 Elective classes
 Advances in Consumer Behaviour 
  
  This class provides you with an understanding of some of the contemporary issues and challenges in understanding consumers. Building on the undergraduate Consumer Behaviour class, this module aims to develop your ability to analyse consumer behaviour in a variety of situations and to explore the complexity of 21st century consumption. 
  The class reviews consumer trends and the significance of consumer culture, and then explores topics that are the focus of recent research attention. Current topics include consumer identity (possessions and body image); consumer vulnerability; postmodern consumers; consumer tribes; consumption spaces; consumers and celebrities and consumers and ethics. 
 
 Managing Customer Relationships 
 
   The class explores the development of relationship marketing from its transactional roots and introduces concepts such as: CRM, customer loyalty, customer equity and customer perspectives on relationships. A contemporary look at relationships within marketing is introduced through examination of S-D Logic, co-creation and customer engagement, these highlight how firms build and utilise relationships with a customer ‘resource’ to create and offer increasingly more specialised and individualised offerings. 
 
 International Business Management 
  
  This class examines the theoretical underpinnings which help explain the operations of such enterprises, covering both international business strategy and international business management. This will be achieved by exploring contemporary issues in academic thought and international business practice. 
 
 Managing Integrated Marketing Communications: Theory & Practice 
 
   The class will create a learning environment in which you can enhance your knowledge of relevant marketing communications theories and develop the necessary analytical, creative and decision-making skills required to effectively manage IMC in a variety of contexts. 
 
 Sports Marketing 
  
  This class provides you with an opportunity to study and apply marketing principles and concepts to a sector that has gained increasing significance in society world-wide. We’ve witnessed the emergence of a sports culture in many countries. This, in turn, has led to the emergence of sport as a global industry. 
  Sport is one of the most important sectors in the UK in terms of spectator interest, participation and consumer spending. It is also a varied industry consisting of sports products as well as sports services, spectator sports, sports media and sport-related travel. 
  
 