Course content 
 Year 1 
 Personal Development Planning (PDP)
 
   You normally have the same Personal Development Adviser (PDA) throughout your degree. PDP is an important part of learning and personal development. It's not only associated with your university course, it allows you to plan for the future. 
 
 Chemistry: Principles & Practice 1 & 2
 
   These lectures and tutorials cover all the broad areas of chemistry including: Analytical Chemistry, Structure & Bonding, Physical Chemistry, Inorganic Chemistry, Organic Chemistry and Spectroscopy. 
 
 Practical & Transferable Skills
 
   All students have one laboratory class per week which runs in both Semester 1 and Semester 2. 
 
 Mathematics
 
   Aims to give a basic understanding of mathematical functions, differentiation, integration, complex numbers, matrices and vectors. 
 
 Molecular Bioscience
 
   Covers cellular structure and function and is concerned with the chemical basis of life and the fundamentals of cell biochemistry. The molecular basis of inheritance, human genetics, genes and the environment are also covered. 
 
 Elective classes
  
  You can select elective classes freely from the University timetable subject to your possessing appropriate entrance qualifications, there being places available, and the times do not clash with compulsory chemistry classes. 
  Subjects are available in: 
   
   Science 
   Engineering 
   Business 
   Arts & Humanities 
   
  Chemistry students are provided with a list of classes where the timetable is suitable, although other options are also available. Students often choose a language class as an elective. 
 
 Year 2 
 Inorganic Chemistry
 
   Aims to provide a broad knowledge of the important concepts in inorganic chemistry from which more specialist topics can be tackled. This includes investigation of the chemistry of the main group and transition metals and introduces topics at the forefront of inorganic and materials chemistry. 
 
 Fundamental Organic Chemistry
 
   Covers the fundamental principles of infra-red, ultra-violet, nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectroscopy; develops competence in the interpretation of spectra and the students’ awareness of the role of spectroscopic techniques. It will also develop knowledge of reactions, understanding of mechanisms and appreciation of the role of reactivity in organic chemistry. 
 
 Physical Chemistry 1
  
  This class provides a broad knowledge of the important concepts in Thermodynamics, investigating the major features as applied to chemical systems. Topics include: 
   
   the importance of reaction rates in chemical systems 
   concepts of the electrode/solution interface 
   equilibrium and electron transfer kinetics 
   mass transport 
   the composition and utilisation of fossil fuels with their environmental pollutants 
   nuclear and renewable energy sources 
   
 
 Pharmaceutics
  
  This class provides an introduction to: 
   
   thermodynamics, and its application to pharmaceutical systems 
   chemical kinetics, and the stability of drug molecules 
   the solid state, where a knowledge of crystal structure often explains drug properties 
   dissolution and solubility, and their importance to drug absorption 
   surface chemistry, and the role of surface-active compounds in formulation in the solubilisation of drug molecules 
   
 
 Year 3 
 Study abroad 
  
  Students have the option to spend third year studying abroad in a sister University in the European Union or the European Free Trade Area. 
  We're leading practitioners of the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS), designed to simplify and facilitate the planning and recognition of periods of study in other universities. Additional EU funding under the ERASMUS programme may be available to some students each year to supplement their SAAS grants. 
  There will also be opportunities to spend third year at one of the premier universities in the USA or in Canada, but you'll have to find some money towards the costs. 
 
 Physical Chemistry 2
  
  Provides an understanding of intermolecular forces and their importance in defining key aspects of chemical behaviour and molecular organisation. The class introduces: 
   
   surface chemistry and the common systems in which it plays a major role 
   the electronic structure of atoms and molecules through the prism of quantum chemistry 
   group theory and how it can be applied to the determination of the symmetry of molecules and their properties 
   the principles of bonding in molecules as described by valence bond and molecular orbital theories 
   
 
 Practical Physical, Applied & Drug Discovery Chemistry
  
  Students conduct experiments in physical and applied chemistry and in chemistry relating to drug discovery, gaining practical experience of theoretic aspects of physical, applied and synthetic medicinal chemistry covered in lectures. 
  You'll develop: 
   
   laboratory skills 
   skills in physical chemistry & analytical observation 
   the use of statistical methods 
   synthetic medicinal chemistry & analysis 
   applications of spectroscopy & common instrumental techniques 
   the writing of laboratory reports 
   
 
 Practical Organic & Inorganic Chemistry 
 
   You'll receive a practical demonstration of topics contained in the lectures. You'll develop basic laboratory skills in preparative chemistry and analysis, and gain experience in the applications of spectroscopy and common instrumental techniques. 
 
 Chemical Biology
  
  This course will provide a detailed overview on the structure, function and chemistry of biological macromolecules such as proteins, nucleic acids, lipids and carbohydrates. Topics include: 
   
   protein & nucleic acid folding 
   energetics of macromolecular interactions (kinetics & thermodynamics) 
   mechanistic enzymology 
   
  The overarching theme in this course is that structure and function are intimately linked. 
 
 Intermediate Organic Chemistry & Spectroscopy
  
  This class teaches modern NMR spectroscopy as it is applied to chemistry. It covers skills for handling and interpreting NMR data for the purposes of chemical structure elucidation. 
  The theoretical basis of the NMR experiment using the vector formalism. The reactivities of organic molecules. Organic syntheses using the disconnection approach. The synthesis and reactivities of electron-poor and electron-rich heterocyclic molecules. Also provides an insight into the role of computational chemistry in chemical research and training in the use of modern computational chemistry software. 
 
 Inorganic Chemistry, Structures & Spectroscopy
 
   This class provides a more advanced view of main group and transition metal coordination and organometallic chemistry. Themes covered include: 
   
   ligands & their influence on complexes 
   trends in structure & bonding, stereochemistry 
   reactivity & the application of spectroscopic & other methods of identification 
   modern spectroscopy as it is applied in chemistry 
   
 
 Year 4 
 Core Chemistry for Drug Discovery
 
   Information to follow. 
  
 