Course content 
 Year 1 
 French 
 Year 1
  
  Students take two combined classes: French 1A (semester 1), French 1B (semester 2). These courses are mainly organised around a linguistic progression towards level B1 in the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages. There is a regular input of cultural background which takes the form of three lectures in semester 1 and two in semester 2 covering the following topics: 
   
 
 The Making of Modern France 
 France in a Global Context 
 Understanding the French Republic 
 French Identities 
 Contemporary French Society   
 
   
  In addition, there is an introductory lecture in semester 2 entitled ‘What is translation about?’ 
  
 Social policy 
 Social Policy & Society in Contemporary Scotland
  
  This class is designed to introduce you to some of the major issues confronting Scottish society and to provide an accessible introduction to some of the key concerns of Social Policy.   It will examine a range of issues, including questions of poverty and inequality, social divisions, health, housing, education, and criminal justice. 
 
 Private Issues & Public Problems
  
  This class examines the different ways in which ‘private issues’ become recognised as ‘public problems’.   Using a number of different case studies, such as domestic violence, homelessness or poverty, it will look at the different ways in which social problems have been identified and at the different standpoints from which they can be viewed. 
 
 Year 2  
 French
 
 Students take two language classes as in Year 1. The language courses are based on a series of classes.
  
 Le Monde du Travail
  
  Cultural focus:  time (35 hour week, RTT and ‘ponts’, paternity/maternity leave, …) & ‘human resources’ (hierarchical organisation, discrimination, unions, relocation,…) 
  Linguistic focus: the negation, asking questions, using pronouns. 
 
 La France et L'Europe 
  
  Cultural focus: the origins of the European ideal, Europe and the EU viewed from France. 
  Linguistic focus: subjunctive mood. 
 
 Immigration & Nationalit&eacute;
  
  Cultural focus: a historical view of immigration in France and a look at the specificity of the French ‘integration’ system. 
  Linguistic focus: the system of tenses in French (concentrating on past tenses). 
 
 Les Femmes en Politique 
  
  Cultural focus: a further look (after first year) at French politics, concentrating on topical issues. 
  Linguistic focus: modal verbs. 
 
 Les R&eacute;gions
  
  Cultural focus: decentralisation, importance of regions in France. 
  Linguistic focus: the passive voice. 
 
 L’&Eacute;conomie
  
  Cultural focus: the French economy (role of the state, …), marketing &agrave; la fran&ccedil;aise 
  Linguistic focus: equivalent of –ing in French. 
  In addition, students specialising in French take  the French  Culture and History 2 class. This class focuses on the Occupation and French Colonialism/Decolonisation. The historical context for each topic is first set, and documents from the two periods studied, before discussion moves on to the cultural domain, via analysis of the following texts and films: 
   
   Au Revoir les Enfants (film, Malle) 
   Stupeur et Tremblements (text, Nothomb) 
   L'&Eacute;tranger (text, Camus) 
   Le Samourai (film, Melville) 
   Anthology of historical texts relating to the Second World War 
   Anthology of historical texts relating to French Colonialism/Immigration 
   
  
 Social policy 
 Scottish Social Policy since 1845
  
  This class explores some of the different ways in which social policy has evolved in Scotland in response to a variety of social problems since the introduction of the Scottish Poor Law Act in 1845. It covers all the main areas of social policy, including health, housing, education and poverty, and also explores the changing boundaries between individuals, families, communities, voluntary organisations, commercial welfare and state over the course of this period. 
 
 Key Concepts in Social Welfare
  
  This class explores some of the most important concepts in the academic study of Social Policy, including such concepts as equality, justice, need, happiness, poverty and wellbeing. It also examines a number of different ideological perspectives on these issues, such as liberalism, conservatism, socialism, social democracy, Marxism, feminism and the New Right. 
 
 The Making of Social Policy
  
  This class examines the ways in which social policies are ‘made’ at both a national and international level.   It examines the roles played by different actors, institutions and ideas.   It also looks at the ways in which evidence is used to inform policy-making, and at the ways in which we are all involved, as citizens, in the policy process.   These themes are explored with the aid of a series of case-studies, including health and education policies, and the development and implementation of equalities legislation. 
 
 Year 3 
 French
 Students take two language classes (as in previous years). 
 L’Esclavage Moderne 
  
  Cultural focus: a historical review of slavery and a look at modern forms of slavery. 
  Linguistic focus: reinforcement work on subjunctive mood, passive voice and negative forms. 
 
 Les Nouvelles Fa&ccedil;ons de Consommer
  
  Cultural focus: the impact of consumerism on the environment. 
  Linguistic focus: adjectives and comparative, hypothesis, conditional mood. 
 
 Le Syst&egrave;me &Eacute;ducatif
  
  Cultural focus: a look at current issues in the French education system. 
  Linguistic focus: reported speech, imperative mood, a further look at pronouns. 
 
 L’Ann&eacute;e &agrave; l’&Eacute;tranger
  
  Cultural focus: practical module  aiming at preparing students for the year abroad. 
  There is also a French Studies 3 class: Freedom and Identity in France and the Francophone world. This class is based on the study of the following texts and films as examples of the treatment of the class’s twin themes: 
   
   Milou en mai  (film, Malle) 
   Poverty (various texts) 
   The Dreyfus Affair (various historical texts) 
   Monsieur Klein (film, Losey) 
   Rue des Boutiques Obscures  (text, Modiano) 
   National Identity in the Third Republic (various historical texts) 
   
  
 Social policy
 Compulsory classes: 
 Research Skills in Social Policy
  
  This class will help you to develop your knowledge and understanding of some of the key methods used by researchers in the field of social policy.   It will introduce you to a number of different qualitative and quantitative methods, and to some of the basic principles of research design.   It will provide an essential foundation for your final-year dissertation.﻿ 
 
 Scottish Social Welfare in a UK Context
  
  This class examines the ways in which recent political developments have placed questions of social policy at the heart of debates over the future of the United Kingdom.   To what extent do the different parts of the UK face different social problems?   To what extent do different parts of the UK possess a different approach to the resolution of these issues?   How has the governance of social policy in different parts of the UK been affected by its current constitutional arrangements? 
 
 Year abroad 
 Year abroad
 
   This is the year abroad, spent either studying at a foreign university or working as a language assistant or on a work placement. This year is compulsory to gain entry into Honours.
   
 
 Year 4 
 French 
 French
  
  The language course is based on a series of thematic dossiers dealing with current issues in France and the Francophone world. The focus of the class is on reinforcing and developing key professional language skills, such as translation into English, translation into French, liaison interpreting, and 'expos&eacute;' (formal oral presentation). 
  Students in Joint Honours French will additionally have one or more French Studies 4 classes. Everyone will take the Core Class, Images of Women, which considers the changing portrayal of women over the centuries, using the following texts as the basis of discussion: 
   
   Madame Bovary (novel, Flaubert) 
   Fatale (novel, Manchette) 
   L’&eacute;v&eacute;nement (Ernaux, novel) 
   Women in the Paris Commune of 1871 (various historical documents) 
   
  Joint Honours students not writing a dissertation in French will take these two further classes: 
   
   The Occupation and its portrayal in French films 
   France since 1945 
   
  
 Social policy
 
 Compulsory classes:
  
 The Welfare State in Comparative Perspective
  
  This class examines the development of welfare states as a global phenomenon.   It asks what we mean by the concept of a ‘welfare state’ and looks at the ways in which welfare states have developed in different countries.   It also explores some of the major differences between different types of welfare state, using the concept of ‘welfare r&eacute;gimes’. 
 
 Dissertation
  
  Many students find that the dissertation is the most fulfilling part of their degree. It will provide you with the opportunity to undertake your own in-depth investigation into a topic of your choice, and to develop skills as an independent researcher. 
  
 