Course content 
 Year 1 
 Italian 
 Italian 1A 
  
  This intensive class, for those with SQA ‘Higher’ or equivalent, will enable you to develop the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A2 of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Italian 1B 
  
  Following on from Italian 1A, this intensive programme will broaden your knowledge of the Italian language, and enhance basic skills already acquired in reading, writing, listening and speaking. It'll also introduce you to new aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
  
 
 or﻿
 
 Introduction to Italian 1A 
  
  This intensive class, for beginners or false beginners, will enable you to develop the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A1 of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Introduction to Italian 1B 
  
  Following on from Introduction to Italian 1A, this accelerated and intensive programme will broaden your knowledge of the Italian language, and enhance basic skills already acquired in reading, writing, listening and speaking. It'll also introduce you to new aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This class aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
  
 Hospitality & Tourism  
 Introduction to Hospitality & Tourism Management
  
  This class introduces you to key issues and concepts in relation to hospitality and tourism management. Gradually you're immersed into the sector and key issues while you apply theories from different fields to the understanding of Hospitality and Tourism.   
 
 Year 2 
 Italian 
 Italian 2A 
  
  This class will introduce you to more complex and formal areas of language, and enable you to develop further the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It will also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This course aims to bring you up to level A2+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Italian 2B
  
  This class will introduce you to yet more complex and formal areas of language, and enable you to develop further the skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking in Italian. It'll also introduce you to certain aspects of the culture of Italy through the materials used. This course aims to bring you up to level B1+ of the Common European Framework for Languages. 
 
 Modern Italy - State, Culture & Society
  
  This class provides a comprehensive overview of the major developments in Italian history, society and culture from the Unification to the present day. In Semester 1, you'll study 20th century Italian social, political and cultural history, while in Semester 2, you'll analyse a range of films and a literary text. This is an interdisciplinary class which can be taken by students with no knowledge of Italian. 
  
 Hospitality & Tourism  
 Service Encounter Management
  
  In the hospitality and tourism sector, much of the customer engagement and value delivery takes place within the service encounter. In this class you'll learn how the management of this dynamic environment requires an integrated approach where customers, employees and the service setting itself require to be managed. 
 
 Destination Marketing Management
  
  Nations, regions and cities: destinations are products for Hospitality and Tourism, inward investment and higher education. You'll explore challenges in managing and marketing destinations across organisational and product boundaries using a range of industry contexts.   
 
 Year 3 
 Italian 
 Italian Language 3A
  
  This class aims to build on the students’ knowledge and understanding of the Italian language and shifts the emphasis from the acquisition of linguistic knowledge to the production of a varied linguistic output both orally and in writing. In addition to classes in written and spoken Italian students also take a course in translation from Italian into English, which includes an introduction to translation theory and practice. 
 
 Italian Language 3B
  
  This class builds on the progress students have made in Italian 3A in spoken and written language. Students take a class in translation from English into Italian and engage in a large-scale group project, which encourages the development of a range of research and presentation skills. 
 
 Italian Stage & Screen
  
  The course explores the distinctive contribution made by Italian theatre and Italian cinema. Focusing on specific texts, such as Mascagni’s Cavalleria Rusticana, Luigi Pirandello’s Sei personaggi in cerca d’autore and Dario Fo’s Morte accidentale di un anarchico, and on films such as Germi’s Divorzio all'italiana and Moretti's Caro diario, students are encouraged to engage critically with the individual works studied in their exploration of the crucial contribution which Italy has made to the development of these two genres. 
  
 Hospitality & Tourism  
 Industry Placement
  
  You have the opportunity to gain experience working with industry professionals, to develop practical skills and reflective practice and to build networks for possible future employment. You'll reflect upon and evaluate not only your own performance, but also the organisation, its output or key activities, and broader social, cultural and economic role. 
 
 Events Management
  
  In this class you'll work in a team to design, organise, run and evaluate your own event for charity. Through this practical exercise, you'll be exposed to the realities and challenges of events management and teamwork. This class adds to the experiential content of the Hospitality & Tourism Management programme whilst retaining rigorous theoretical underpinnings and strong coverage of events management at an advanced level. 
 
 Developing Theory into Action
  
  Using academic theory and literature, combined with real life industry practice, you'll develop your abilities to draw out understanding of the value of management theory and link its relevance to the management practice; second, you'll also develop the ability of critical self-reflection as a future practising manager. 
 
 Year abroad 
 Year abroad
  
  This is the year abroad, spent either studying in an Italian university or working as a language assistant or on a work placement. This year is compulsory to gain entry into Honours. 
 
 Year 4 
 Italian 
 Italian 4 Language A (Spoken Skills) 
  
  By this stage students can deal effectively and appropriately with a wide range of normal, everyday situations in Italian, and can function in a variety of contexts. In this class we focus on the development of specific communicative skills, in a formal register. This takes the form of an esposizione in which the student speaks on a prepared topic from a particular point of view, and bilateral interpreting, in which the student is asked to act as channel of information in two languages. 
 
 Italian 4 Language B (Writing Skills)
  
  This class builds on the experiences gained in Years 1-3, and further develops student skills in writing in formal Italian. The class involves the production of pieces of writing in Italian (summaries, reports), typically based on texts in English on Italian topics. 
 
 Italian 4 Language C (Translation)
  
  Taking forward the expertise in translation students have acquired in Years 2-3, the course further develops skills in working from English into Italian and from Italian into English. 
 
 Women, Celebrity Culture & Emancipation in Post-Unification Italy
  
  This course, situated within the socio-historical contexts of both the Risorgimento period and post-unification Italy until WW1, focuses on female performance and its consumption by both female and male spectators as mediated through women writers’ journals, letters, diary entries and realist fictional accounts (novels and short stories). It examines women writers’ relation to the European context and the recurring themes featuring in their popular domestic fiction which was in wide circulation, particularly during the 1880s. 
 
 Italian Resistance Culture
  
  The course is designed to provide students with a detailed knowledge of the Italian Resistance (1943-1945) and its impact on Italian culture, politics and society. It is an interdisciplinary course which requires students to show skills in history, as well as an understanding of literary and cinematic texts. Films/literary texts vary from year to year but typically include works from a wide variety of periods. 
 
 Visions of Italian Terrorism
  
  The course examines the way our understanding of Italian terrorism has been filtered through feature films, documentaries and television programmes. As with other final year studies classes this is an interdisciplinary class, which helps students to develop a wide range of research and analytical skills. 
  
 Hospitality & Tourism  
 Hospitality & Tourism Analysis: Case Studies & Case Histories
  
  This class uses case studies from Hospitality & Tourism and challenges aspects of learning in previous classes. It'll further your understanding and appreciation of the nature of hospitality and tourism too. It encourages reflection on some realities of hospitality and tourism which do not fit neatly into theoretical boxes.   
 
 Being an Ethical Manager
  
  The nature and application of business ethics in contemporary management are explored in this class. It raises key ethical issues from both cultural and stakeholder perspectives and balances them with philosophical and pragmatic considerations. It'll provide you with a clear understanding of the dichotomy between philosophical idealism and the pragmatic considerations of ethical leadership for practical management. 
 
 Management, Enterprise & the Rise of the Global Economy
  
  Inspired by the Harvard approach to management education this class explores three principles of management: 
   
   business strategies are understood through reflection on the complex realities faced by enterprises in competitive arenas 
   firms can only be understood within the context of market dynamics 
   the contemporary situation can never be divorced from the past 
   
 
 Strategy & Leadership
  
  This class will develop your knowledge of strategy and provide insights as to how current and aspiring business leaders can manage strategically. You'll have an enhanced understanding of how individuals within an organisation can effectively lead and manage strategy in a complex and challenging world. 
 
 Family Business: Theory & Practice
  
  The hospitality and tourism industry has a large number of family businesses. Given the prevalence of family businesses – estimates suggest that almost 80% of new ventures are born as family firms and about 60% of the UK’s 4.2 million enterprises are family firms – graduates employed within the SME sector are likely to be employed by family-owned firms. The class examines the distinctive advantages and unique challenges that face family firms. 
  
 