Course content 
 Year 1 
 Politics 
 Politics 1A: Concepts
  
  This class provides an introduction to the study of politics, in particular how modern states around the world work and interact with each other. We devote particular attention to concepts relevant to the systematic study of states in a globally connected world. We will cover a series of key concepts, ranging from the meaning of power, democracy and authoritarianism, to structures and institutions – including elections, referendums and international organisations - that are essential to understanding how modern politics works. 
  Considerable attention is given to the impact of international processes on outcomes in contemporary politics. 
 
 Politics 1B: Government & Governance
  
  This class provides an introduction to the actors, processes and outcomes that are key to modern government and governance. It covers a range of political processes that take place within democratic and non-democratic states and beyond, including for instance the role of the media. Considerable attention is given to the impact of international processes on outcomes in contemporary politics. The class examines a range of outcomes that influence the lives of citizens, including the policies associated with modern welfare states and international trade agreements. 
  
 Education 
 Understanding Education in the 21st Century
  
  This class introduces students to a large and rich seam of disciplinary knowledge. It is an introductory class of potential interest to all who want to understand more about Education. Some of the key content to be addressed in the module is around the following: 
   
   the field of study that is education: what it is and how we know that 
   the context of education: some contribution of political, historical and economic dimensions to curriculum, schooling, policy, globalisation 
   education achievement: some contributions of psychological, sociological and philosophical perspectives to topics such as learning, diversity, gender 
   
 
 Placement and Curriculum
  
  On this module, students from across disciplines work together to learn  about  children and the  communities in which they live; children's health and wellbeing; child protection; children's voice;  children's play and  play places. The notion  that the  health and wellbeing of children and young people is central to the advancement of society is a seminal theme in this module.   
  The placement experience has been designed to allow students to undertake a work placement with children and young people from 0 - 14 years.   Placements  will be  provided  in a range of settings outwith the mainstream classroom. 
 
 Year 2 
 Politics 
 International Relations & Global Politics
  
  This class introduces students to the academic study of International Relations (IR). It examines basic and historical contexts in order to give students a firm grounding in IR. The next part of the course focuses on major theories of IR, which will provide students with conceptual understanding of world affairs. The course then examines the structures and processes within IR, covering topics such as the changing nature of war, international security and international institutions. 
 
 Modern Political Thought
  
  This class provides an introduction to fundamental political concepts, such as justice, democracy, power, authority, liberty and equality. It considers the relationship between the normative evaluation of political systems and how we study them. Students also become familiar with the basic ideologies necessary to understand political debate. 
 
 Comparative Politics
  
  This class focuses on the comparative study of institutions in democratic and authoritarian political systems and what influences their performance and stability. You'll learn what forms economic, social, cultural and political institutions take, and what their effects are on democratic and authoritarian political systems. The underlying theme of the course is the determinants and consequences of democratic and dictatorial institutions. This class enhances that knowledge by outlining research questions about democracy in its various forms and ways they can to be addressed by empirical evidence. 
  
 Education 
 Learners & Learning
 
   This class provides students with an essential understanding of human learning processes and the needs of learners across the life-course. 
 
 Informal Education
 
   This module investigates philosophical and pedagogical interventions beyond the school curriculum in informal settings, with adults in particular. It'll also open up possibilities for informal education techniques and practices to be considered and adopted by a range of professions and to explore potential partnerships between informal education specialists and others. 
 
 Year 3 
 Politics 
 Quantitative Methods in Social Research
  
  The aim of this class is to teach students a range of simple quantitative research methods. Learning these improves your job prospects and equips you better for study in Honours and beyond. It'll also help you better understand the high quantity of statistics published by governments and in the media. 
 
 Research Methods for Political Scientists
  
  In this class you'll learn about different methods of: 
   
   social scientific research 
   reading 
   collecting and analysing data 
   the basic design of quantitative surveys and conducting of qualitative interviews 
   the application of the most widely used statistical software in the social sciences 
   SPSS 
   the basics of uni-variate and bi-variate statistical analysis 
   
  On the basis of the knowledge acquired in this course, students will be able to critically assess the validity and reliability of published research, to develop a research design, and to collect, analyse and present data. 
 
 European Politics
  
  This class provides a comprehensive overview of European politics, identifying the common characteristics of politics and government across the continent, but also the distinguishing features that make individual countries different. 
  Part one examines the emergence and evolution of parties and party systems, focusing on the relationship between parties and society, ideological developments and modernisation processes. Particular attention is given to the emergence of ‘new politics’ and the rise of the far right.   This part of the class concludes with an examination of the different types of electoral system employed in Europe, and the effects they have on politics. 
  Part two focuses on government; the character of government at the centre, multilevel governance, and parliaments. The class combines thematic topics with studies of politics and government in particular countries - France, Germany, Italy, and the countries of eastern and central Europe. 
 
 American Politics
  
  This class introduces students to the basic concepts and theories relating to the study of political institutions, processes, behaviour, and policy in the United States. In the first half of the class we examine ‘American exceptionalism,’ and its political culture. In the second we examine the institutions of the US political system, covering such topics as the constitution, federalism and the branches of the central government. 
  We'll also discuss: 
   
   the US party system 
   political participation and mobilisation 
   individual voting behaviour 
   public opinion 
   nominations and elections 
   media 
   interest groups 
   the question of where power lies 
   
  The class will conclude with a survey of public policy in the United States, in several dimensions. 
 
 Scottish Politics 
  
  The class seeks to provide a comprehensive overview of Scottish politics contextualising it within UK, European and world politics, historical inheritance and contemporary Scottish society. It'll examine the practice of Scotland’s governing institutions, the changing nature of democracy in Scotland, the impact of devolution on policy and broader governance as well as Scotland’s constitutional status. 
 
 Chinese Politics
  
  This class will provide a comprehensive overview of Chinese politics since 1949, contextualising it within the study of comparative politics, historical inheritance and contemporary Chinese society. 
  It will give you grounding in the dynamic evolution of the Chinese state and Chinese nationalism, China’s self-identified problems of weakness and underdevelopment, and the difficult political choices faced by political elites. It will also analyse how the country’s Communist legacy offers both opportunities and constraints for the present politics of China. The case of Taiwan is also included as a comparison. 
 
 Local Politics
  
  This class looks at the issue of who holds power in local politics in the UK as well as examining changing managerial and democratic practice. It asks some fundamental questions about local politics, such as: 
   
   how is local democracy justified? 
   who holds power? 
   what is the basis of that power? 
   what is the role of citizens in localities today? 
   what is the role of local governing institutions? 
   how are local public services delivered 
   how is policy made and delivered? 
   
 
 War, Terrorism & Conflict
  
  This course looks at the multi-faceted and ever-changing nature of war, conflict and terrorism, in the context of the end of the Cold War and the September 11 terrorist attacks. It addresses debates within the sub-discipline of Strategic Studies (i.e. the study of the use of force) and International Relations more broadly, relevant to the causes of war, the conditions of peace and strategies for dealing with terrorism and conflict. 
 
 Parliamentary Studies
  
  This class is co-taught with staff from the UK Parliament and the Scottish Parliament. It also involves deliberative sessions with parliamentarians. 
 
 Contemporary British Governance
  
  The class focuses on how Britain is governed, focusing particularly on how its main institutions and processes – with their own influences, conflict and dynamics – have risen to the multiple challenges of the modern world, ranging from demands for sub-national autonomy in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, to the opportunities and constraints afforded by Britain’s membership of the European Union. 
  
 Education 
 History and Philosophy of Education
  
  This module will support students in developing their knowledge and understanding of the roots of some key educational ideas in history. These will be considered from a philosophical perspective. 
 
 Children & Childhood
  
  This module will focus on children and childhood in contexts other than formal education settings that will be explored elsewhere. The aim of this module is to introduce students to the concepts of child and childhood through a range of representations. The class will draw on children in film, art and literature to explore representations of children and childhood and experiences of childhood. 
 
 Social Pedagogy with Adults
  
  This module is based on an understanding of the evolution of adult learning and the resultant principles that underline current practice and will illustrate how adult educators work and will also open up possibilities for adult education techniques and practices to be considered. It'll also explore potential partnerships between adult educators and others. 
 
 Year 4 
 Politics 
 Theories & Practices of Regulation & Governance
  
  The aim of this class is to introduce students to the concepts, theories, institutions and processes of regulatory governance. The transnational and international dimension of regulatory governance is also taken into account. 
 
 Governance & Development
  
  This class aims to investigate the political determinants of peace and prosperity, conflict and poverty. It also deals with the recent literature on conflict, inequality, and globalisation. A special emphasis will be placed on providing an understanding of the contemporary challenges facing developing countries. 
 
 Political Parties
  
  This class adopts a comparative approach to the study of political parties and party systems, focusing on Europe and the United States. We discuss the main functions and organisational and ideological characteristics of the different types of parties found in these regions, and the way in which parties adapt to social change. 
  We look at the relationship between parties and voters from the alternative theoretical perspectives of class voting, partisan identification and rational choice. We also examine party systems and party government. 
 
 Comparative Politics
  
  The class focuses on how we do comparative politics (methodology). We'll consider the comparative method, and how the scientific method can be applied to the study of politics. We consider the problem of only having a relatively small number of cases to compare, and how we select these, as well as the difference between case-study driven, small-n and large-n studies. We also consider the use of ideal types – the importance of finding a language to compare very complex systems. 
 
 Green Politics
  
  This class is divided into four main blocks: 
   
   green political theory 
   environmental attitudes & behaviour 
   environmental movements 
   green parties 
   
 
 Political Behaviour
  
  The focus of this class is the individual voter. Individual characteristics, such as education, socio-economic status, political attitudes and values, or involvement in social and political networks are looked at. However, contextual factors, such as the institutional framework, can also play a role for a wide range of political actions. 
 
 Feminism & Politics
  
  This class provides a critical introduction to feminism and its implications for politics. Over the last few decades, feminists have systematically challenged the long-standing view that politics is gender-neutral by uncovering masculinist bias and drawing attention to the neglected experiences, values and arguments of women. 
  Feminists have also reconstructed key political concepts and practices and expanded the range of issues and ideas understood to be political. 
 
 International Relations Theory in a Global Age
  
  This class explores debates about key concepts in International Relations theory, in the context of what is widely seen as a new era in the analysis and practice of global politics. The class investigates the 'cutting-edge' of IR theory and makes connections with social and political thought more generally. 
 
 International Security: Concepts & Issues
  
  Students are introduced to the literature and research agendas related to security and conflict studies. Specifically, the course will explore various aspects of civil war, terrorism, international conflict, armed transfers and refugee security. 
 
 Analysing Religion & Politics
  
  The impact of faith upon politics is evident in many ways, including: 
   
   the 1979 revolution in Iran 
   conflicts in Afghanistan and the Middle East 
   the Catholic Church's contribution to democratisation efforts in Latin America and Eastern Europe 
   the role of religious actors in current debates on Islam in the EU 
   
  The class introduces students to the systematic study of these phenomena based on a quantitative methods perspective. Qualitative approaches are also considered. As part of the class assessment, students will conduct an empirical case study. 
  
 Education 
 Compulsory classes
 Dissertation
  
  The Dissertation in Education is designed to further students’ development of a questioning, self-evaluative and reflective approach in a major in-depth piece of work demanding independent, self-motivated study and the sustained application of professional research and enquiry skills. 
  The widest possible range of topics, types of project, modes of enquiry and of research techniques is encouraged. What projects have in common is the individual student’s ownership and control of the project and the expectation of high quality work. 
  
 Elective classes
 Choose from this list
 Policy and Politics in Education
  
  This class will provide students with the opportunity to engage in debate about current issues in education through detailed exploration of the policy and political contexts. It will introduce students to frameworks for understanding how policy comes about and how it is inextricably linked with political issues. 
 
 Social Issues in Education
  
  This module will teach students about the responsibility of teachers for the education, health and well-being of all children, in the context of a complex and diverse society.   It will also address the needs of those who will work with children, young people and adults in a variety of education-related contexts through its focus on a range of key social issues and the relevant national legislative and policy framework. 
 
 Social Research Methods
  
  This class prepares you for designing and completing a research project. It will equip you with the skills and knowledge required in planning and delivering a research project. 
  
 