Course content 
 Year 1 
 Personal Development Planning (PDP)
 
   You normally have the same Personal Development Adviser (PDA) throughout your degree. PDP is an important part of learning and personal development. It's not only associated with your university course, it allows you to plan for the future. 
 
 Chemistry: Principles & Practice 1 & 2
 
   These lectures and tutorials cover all the broad areas of chemistry including: 
   
   
   analytical chemistry 
   structure & bonding 
   physical chemistry 
   inorganic chemistry 
   organic chemistry 
   spectroscopy 
   
 
 Practical & Transferable Skills
 
   All students have one laboratory class per week which runs in both Semester 1 and Semester 2. 
 
 Mathematics
 
   This class aims to give a basic understanding of:
   
   
   mathematical functions 
   differentiation 
   integration 
   complex numbers 
   matrices & vectors 
   
 
 Mechanics, Optics & Waves
 
   This class provides you with an understanding of motion of simple mechanical systems, gravitation and simple harmonic motion. You'll also learn about the fundamentals of wave propagation and the superposition of waves as well as simple optical phenomena such as diffraction. 
 
 Molecular Bioscience
 
   You'll study cellular structure and function and is concerned with the chemical basis of life and the fundamentals of cell biochemistry. The molecular basis of inheritance, human genetics, genes and the environment are also covered. 
 
 Elective classes
  
  You can select elective classes from the University if you have the appropriate entrance qualifications, there are places available, and the times do not clash with compulsory chemistry classes. 
  Subjects are available in Science, Engineering, Business, Arts & Humanities. 
  Chemistry students are provided with a list of classes where the timetable is suitable, although other options are also available. Students often choose a language class, or Introduction to Forensic Science as an elective. 
 
 Year 2 
 Transferable Skills
 
   The programme provides a framework for a wide range of team-working and problem solving skills in a general chemistry related context, and includes scientific writing, group working and chemical drawing software. 
 
 Inorganic Chemistry
 
   This class aims to provide a broad knowledge of the important concepts in inorganic chemistry from which more specialist topics can be tackled. This includes investigation of the chemistry of the main group and transition metals and introduces topics at the forefront of inorganic and materials chemistry. 
 
 Fundamental Organic Chemistry
 
   This class covers the fundamental principles of infra-red, ultra-violet, nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectroscopy; develops competence in the interpretation of spectra and your awareness of the role of spectroscopic techniques. It will also develop knowledge of reactions, understanding of mechanisms and appreciation of the role of reactivity in organic chemistry. 
 
 Physical Chemistry 1
 
   This class provides a broad knowledge of the important concepts in Thermodynamics, investigating the major features as applied to chemical systems. Topics include: 
   
   
   the importance of reaction rates in chemical systems 
   concepts of the electrode/solution interface 
   equilibrium & electron transfer kinetics 
   mass transport 
   the composition & utilisation of fossil fuels with their environmental pollutants 
   nuclear & renewable energy sources 
   
 
  
 Expand AllCollapse All-->
 Forensic Trace Analysis & Analytical Chemistry
  
  This class provides fundamental concepts of separation science and outlines its importance in obtaining information about analytes in a sample. It also covers the fundamental concepts of recovery of trace evidence and treatment of materials to provide identification. You're taught how to handle, examine and assess errors in chemical measurements. 
 
 Year 3 
 Study abroad
  
  You'll have the option to spend third year studying abroad in a sister University in the European Union or the European Free Trade Area. 
  We're leading practitioners of the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS), designed to simplify and facilitate the planning and recognition of periods of study in other universities. Additional EU funding under the ERASMUS programme may be available to some students each year to supplement their SAAS grants. 
  There will also be opportunities to spend third year at one of the premier universities in the USA or in Canada, but you will have to find some money towards the costs. 
 
 Transferable Skills
 
   The programme provides a framework for a wide range of team-working and problem solving skills in a general chemistry related context, and includes a poster production and presentation; data retrieval; verbal presentation and a quality systems workshop. 
 
 Industrial Placement Preparation
 
   Arrangements for your industrial placement are made during your third year. A speaker from the Careers Service will visit the Department to give advice on the preparation of your CV and interview skills. 
 
 Physical Chemistry 2
 
   Provides an understanding of intermolecular forces and their importance in defining key aspects of chemical behaviour and molecular organisation. The class introduces:
   
   
   surface chemistry and the common systems in which it plays a major role 
   the electronic structure of atoms and molecules through the prism of quantum chemistry 
   group theory and how it can be applied to the determination of the symmetry of molecules and their properties 
   the principles of bonding in molecules as described by valence bond and molecular orbital theories 
   
 
 Practical Organic & Inorganic Chemistry
 
   You'll receive a practical demonstration of topics contained in the lectures. You'll also develop basic laboratory skills in preparative chemistry and analysis, and gain experience in the applications of spectroscopy and common instrumental techniques. 
 
 Intermediate Organic Chemistry & Spectroscopy
 
   This class teaches modern NMR spectroscopy as it is applied to chemistry. It covers: 
   
   
   skills for handling and interpreting NMR data for the purposes of chemical structure elucidation 
   the theoretical basis of the NMR experiment using the vector formalism 
   the reactivities of organic molecules 
   organic syntheses using the disconnection approach 
   the synthesis and reactivities of electron-poor and electron-rich heterocyclic molecules 
   insight into the role of computational chemistry in chemical research and training in the use of modern computational chemistry software 
   
 
 Inorganic Chemistry, Structures & Spectroscopy
  
  This class provides a more advanced view of main group and transition metal coordination and organometallic chemistry. Themes to be covered include: 
   
   ligands and their influence on complexes 
   trends in structure and bonding 
   stereochemistry 
   reactivity 
   the application of spectroscopic and other methods of identification 
   modern spectroscopy as it is applied in chemistry 
   
 
 Practical Physical, Applied, Forensic & Analytical Chemistry
 
   You'll conduct experiments and gain practical experience of the theoretical aspects covered in lectures. You'll develop skills in:
   
   
   the demonstration of physical chemical principles 
   observation 
   the use of statistical methods 
   interpretation of data and the writing of laboratory and court reports 
   
 
 Practical Physical, Applied & Drug Discovery Chemistry
  
  You'll conduct experiments in physical and applied chemistry and in chemistry relating to drug discovery, gaining practical experience of theoretic aspects of physical, applied and synthetic medicinal chemistry covered in lectures. 
  You'll develop laboratory skills in: 
   
   physical chemistry and analytical observation 
   the use of statistical methods 
   synthetic medicinal chemistry and analysis 
   applications of spectroscopy and common instrumental techniques 
   the writing of laboratory reports 
   
 
 Analytical Chemistry & Drugs of Abuse
  
  This class covers the fundamental analytical methods and advanced theories in chromatography, mass spectrometry and electro-separations. It introduces the concept of experimental design and its application in analytical, forensic and preparative chemistry, and how to perform analytical calculations and interpret data. 
  The analytical procedures used to identify substances controlled under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, Misuse of Drugs Regulations 2001, the Medicines Act 1968 and the World Anti-Doping Agency. Students are introduced to methods of clandestine synthesis and how drug profiling can identify the synthetic route used. The pharmacology of drugs of abuse and the various biological matrices used in drug screening will also be described. 
 
 Chemical Biology
  
  This course provides a detailed overview on the structure, function and chemistry of biological macromolecules such as proteins, nucleic acids, lipids and carbohydrates. 
  Topics include: 
   
   protein & nucleic acid folding 
   energetics of macromolecular interactions (kinetics & thermodynamics) 
   mechanistic enzymology 
   
  The overarching theme in this course is that structure and function are intimately linked. 
 
 Year 4 
 Initial Teacher Training
 
   You'll undertake the Initial Teacher Education year, in our School of Education, including teaching practice in schools. You'll also study a range of core chemistry classes. 
 
 Compulsory classes
  
   
   Distance Learning Assignment 
   Pedagogy & Curriculum Chemistry with Science 1 (PGDE Level 4) 
   Pedagogy & Placement Learning 1A   
   Educational Studies 1 (PGDE Level 4) 
   
 
 Year 5 
 Transferable Skills
  
  You'll complete two oral presentations, and are given feedback on both presentation style and content. 
  You'll also attend sessions on: 
   
   thesis writing 
   including plagiarism software 
   Endnote referencing 
   scientific writing 
   chemical drawing software 
   
 
 Core Chemistry
 
   Subjects include:
   
   
   organic chemistry 
   cage & cluster molecules 
   environmental chemistry 
   interpretative spectroscopy 
   transition metal chemistry 
   nanochemistry 
   understanding molecules & materials 
   
 
 Chemistry Specialisation
  
  Subjects include: 
   
   advanced & modern methods in organic synthesis 
   molecular catalysis 
   photochemistry & industrial catalysis 
   polymers: synthesis & chemical properties 
   solid state chemistry 
   advanced electrochemistry 
   
 
 MChem Project & Dissertation
 
   Details TBC. 
  
 