Course content 
 The Management Development Programme (MDP) is a core element of the undergraduate degree programme in the Strathclyde Business School. 
 The programme runs for the first three years of the BA degree. The entire class is driven by real business problems. The approach to learning is active problem-based, with students working in project teams. 
 The class aims to encourage integration of the knowledge and experience gained in Principal Subjects. Each year of the MDP focuses on different aspects of business and the content of MDP is constantly evolving and being updated and enhanced. 
 Year 1 
 Accounting 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
 
 Course summary
  
  Introduction to accounting and finance, complemented by study of economics and law. 
  
 Marketing 
 Introduction to Marketing
  
  Marketing is a key part of any successful business, and a good theoretical and practical knowledge of the subject will be of immense benefit to an aspiring manager or entrepreneur. In this class, you'll be exposed to concepts and ideas from economics, sociology, psychology, geography and other social sciences, all in the context of the competitive business environment. 
 
 Year 2 
 Accounting 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
 
 Course summary
  
  Students develop skills in financial and management accounting and have the opportunity to study taxation. 
  
 Marketing 
 Semester 1
 Understanding Consumers & Markets
  
  Many of the fundamental concepts of marketing are based on an ability to understand consumers and the marketing concept can be implemented more effectively when adequate information about the market and potential consumer behaviour is available. Marketing Research and customer information provide a critical input to the planning and development of a company's marketing strategy in relation to marketing communications, strategic marketing and branding. 
  
 Semester 2
 Services & Retail Marketing
  
  At the heart of this class is the recognition that services present unique challenges, and that building customer relationships through quality service is fundamental to marketing success in every organisation. Over the past decade the retail sector has been one of the most dynamic areas in business. The retail sector also provides a very clear indication of the overall health and robustness of the economy. The rise or fall of the individual’s disposable income is very quickly reflected in terms of expenditure on items. In this respect, the retail sector acts as the weather vane for the economy. 
 
 Year 3 
 Accounting 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
 
 Course summary
  
  Students study advanced topics in financial and management accounting and auditing. By the end of this year, you'll normally have completed the accreditation requirements for professional accountancy bodies, provided you have taken the classes prescribed for the accredited pathway. 
  
 Marketing 
 Semester 1
 Marketing Communications
  
  This module will explore relevant marketing communications theory, consider the role and purpose of marketing communications, critically review the different ways in which organisations can communicate (the marketing communications mix) and consider how marketing communication tools are used in practice. The module will also consider the need for Integrated Marketing Communications and identify those factors that impact upon the selection of an effective marketing communications mix. 
 
 Essentials of International Marketing
  
  This class aims to develop knowledge of international marketing theory and practice. The increased scope, risk and complexity faced by the international marketer is due to the increased level of uncertainty from operating in diverse and less understood environments. Emphasis is placed on the identification of challenges presented by international marketing to equip students to deal with differences, opportunities and threats emerging from diverse economic, demographic, political/legal, cultural, technical and competitive environments. 
  
 Semester 2
 Strategic Marketing
  
  The mission of this class is to provide students with a clear understanding of how to formulate business strategies using marketing concepts and theories. The course will review the tools necessary to analyse business cases, particularly looking at companies that are in the forefront of business today. It also provides an overview of the marketing plan and attention will be on the implications for planning and strategy development. 
 
 Management of Sales Operations
  
  A key aspect of the class is to evaluate selling strategies that can improve the productivity and effectiveness of sales operations via organisational structure, territory control and customer planning and setting sales targets. In addition, we’ll evaluate sales performance in terms of the behaviour and characteristics of salespeople and their interaction with buyers. 
 
 Year 4 
 Accounting 
 Course summary
  
  Honours classes include: 
   
   Management Accounting Theory & Practice 
   Accounting Information Systems 
   Sustainability Accounting 
   Theory & Practice 
   Strategic Accounting & Financial Management in Entrepreneurial Firms 
   Public Sector Accounting 
   Accounting Theories 
   Accounting & Risk 
   Corporate Governance 
   Contemporary Issues in International Financial Reporting 
   Understanding 21st-century Accounting Technologies & Institutional Structures 
   Integrative Studies in Management & Accounting 
   Accounting Ethics 
   Auditing Theory & Practice and Taxation 
   
     
  
 Marketing 
 Compulsory classes
 Brand Management 
  
  The importance of brands raises significant questions of how to develop brand equity and how to communicate a branding strategy of differentiation, value and identification. The role of the Brand Manager is reviewed along with formulating the necessary communication strategies to build brand equity and secure market share. 
  More recent approaches in this vein suggest that the traditional Brand Management approach is all too limited, leaving many questions unanswered. Consequently more recent approaches address the co-construction of brand value, through viral branding, using social media, co-branding and brand extensions. In this respect, the principles of branding are now being applied beyond simply new product development, to such strategies as places, communities and countries. 
  Other key strategies that may be discussed include, luxury branding, nation branding, business-to-business branding and corporate brands. 
 
 Social Marketing 
  
  This course aims to build on your knowledge of traditional commercial-oriented Marketing, by examining applications of Marketing in a social context. Each year millions of pounds are spent world-wide to combat health and social problems such as HIV/AIDS, smoking, drug and alcohol abuse and rising obesity levels. At the same time excessive consumptions burdens society with building landfills and increasing pollution. Meanwhile there are still people who consume ‘too little’ and who suffer from hunger. 
  The class considers recent research in a variety of Social Marketing contexts and material is continuously updated to ensure that students gain an understanding of the most relevant and critical Social Marketing trends. 
 
 Dissertation 
 
   The dissertation is an important part of the fourth year programme. Single honours students are required to submit a dissertation in Marketing while joint Honours students can submit a dissertation in Marketing or in their other Honours subject. 
  
 Elective classes
 Advances in Consumer Behaviour 
  
  This class provides you with an understanding of some of the contemporary issues and challenges in understanding consumers. Building on the undergraduate Consumer Behaviour class, this module aims to develop your ability to analyse consumer behaviour in a variety of situations and to explore the complexity of 21st century consumption. 
  The class reviews consumer trends and the significance of consumer culture, and then explores topics that are the focus of recent research attention. Current topics include consumer identity (possessions and body image); consumer vulnerability; postmodern consumers; consumer tribes; consumption spaces; consumers and celebrities and consumers and ethics. 
 
 Managing Customer Relationships 
 
   The class explores the development of relationship marketing from its transactional roots and introduces concepts such as: CRM, customer loyalty, customer equity and customer perspectives on relationships. A contemporary look at relationships within marketing is introduced through examination of S-D Logic, co-creation and customer engagement, these highlight how firms build and utilise relationships with a customer ‘resource’ to create and offer increasingly more specialised and individualised offerings. 
 
 International Business Management 
  
  This class examines the theoretical underpinnings which help explain the operations of such enterprises, covering both international business strategy and international business management. This will be achieved by exploring contemporary issues in academic thought and international business practice. 
 
 Managing Integrated Marketing Communications: Theory & Practice 
 
   The class will create a learning environment in which you can enhance your knowledge of relevant marketing communications theories and develop the necessary analytical, creative and decision-making skills required to effectively manage IMC in a variety of contexts. 
 
 Sports Marketing 
  
  This class provides you with an opportunity to study and apply marketing principles and concepts to a sector that has gained increasing significance in society world-wide. We’ve witnessed the emergence of a sports culture in many countries. This, in turn, has led to the emergence of sport as a global industry. 
  Sport is one of the most important sectors in the UK in terms of spectator interest, participation and consumer spending. It is also a varied industry consisting of sports products as well as sports services, spectator sports, sports media and sport-related travel. 
  
 