Course content 
 Dissertation in Psychology
  
  The dissertation is an opportunity for you to undertake an original piece of research, closely supervised by a single member of staff. Planning for the dissertation begins in year 3, and dissertations can be of such high standards that they are subsequently published in peer-reviewed academic journals. 
 
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice I & II
  
  If you take only one of these classes, you'll choose two of the following topics. 
  If you take both these classes, you're permitted to choose four: 
   
   Qualitative Methods 
   Social Development 
   Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology 
   Cognitive Impairment in Psychological Disorders 
   Practical Aspects of Memory 
   Artificial Intelligence 
   
     
     
 
 Year 1 
 History 
 History 1A
  
  This class focuses on the history of the British Isles from 1700 to 1914. It was a period of phenomenal change in terms of who ruled the country, the main economic activities, emerging cultural expression and attitudes and the growth of British power overseas on an unprecedented scale. 
  In the class we'll use the British Isles as a historical 'laboratory' to discuss key themes that have shaped the modern world. 
  We'll look at: 
   
   the formation of the British state 
   the ideas that were shaped by the Enlightenment, in which Scottish writers played an important part 
   why Britain industrialised and Ireland did not 
   the often dire social consequences of industrialisation 
   how and why Britain created the Empire 
   the growth of British overseas trade will be looked at 
   the impact of Britain on Asian, African and American societies 
   the ideological effects of the American War of Independence, the French Revolution and the 1798 rebellion in Ireland 
   the meaning of Victorian values in Scotland and the development of modern political parties and the growth of democracy 
   the roles of gender and class in shaping modern British and Irish society 
   This class will enable students to understand the origins of both modern British society and the beginnings of an increasingly integrated global community. In the tutorials, each meeting will involve the examination of a key document or two, as well as a discussion of that week's topic. 
 
 History 1B
  
  This class follows on from History 1A and takes the story up to the end of the 20th century. We'll look at: 
   
   the effects of World War I on Scottish society and why Ireland broke away from the United Kingdom 
   the growth of the Labour Party and the rise of socialism will be traced 
   the effects of the Great Depression of the 1930s on British society 
   the reasons why the British government formulated a policy of appeasement, to show how foreign policy and domestic policy were inextricably linked 
   the impact of World War II on British society 
   the demands that led to the creation of the Welfare State will be explored 
   the new international realities facing Britain in 1945 
   the beginnings of the Cold War, to show how effectively Britain adapted to the loss of Great Power status 
   post-war society and the cultural revolution of the "Swinging Sixties". We'll ask whether a generation gap emerged 
   the long slow march of women's rights 
   the impact of immigration, to show the ways in which British society was changing fundamentally 
   the collapse of the traditional industrial economy in the 1980s and changes in Scottish family life, to show how social norms were being overturned 
   the advent and effects of devolution in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
   
  Just as in the first semester History class, we will use carefully selected documents in tutorials to help us analyse each topic. 
  
 Psychology 
 Psychology 1a
  
  You'll take this class in semester 1 and are not expected to have any prior knowledge of psychology. It explores learning theory, developmental psychology, personality, biological psychology, and the scientific basis for psychology. 
 
 Psychology 1b
  
  This class is taught in semester 2 and covers sensation and perception, cognitive psychology, social psychology, abnormal psychology, and research methods. 
 
 Year 2 
 History
 
 Choose three from this list﻿
  
 Scotland: Renaissance and Reformation
  
  This course will focus on the period from the final establishment of the territorial boundaries of the Scottish kingdom in James III’s reign through to the Union of Crowns in 1603. In covering the era of the Renaissance and Reformation in Scotland, as well as the regnal union of 1603, it will focus on the reigns of successive Stewart monarchs and their subsequent accession to the English and Irish thrones, thereby creating a British imperial monarchy. 
  Scotland’s contact with Europe and its strained relations with England form core themes but political history will be studied in the light of the social, religious, economic and cultural developments that lend early-modern Scotland its distinct identity, thereby examining issues such as trade and economic development, the impact of the Renaissance in Scotland, literacy and the spread of reforming ideas, the arts, education and issues of identity. 
 
 Disease & Society
  
  This class provides a broad introduction to the historical relationship between diseases and human societies in the early modern and modern periods. 
  It examines the core thesis that diseases and other health conditions have had dramatic impacts on history, shaping economic relations, political and social structures and cultural and religious beliefs.   However, it also explores the reverse of this, the thesis that human activities, ideas and behaviours have radically altered the diseases and conditions that afflict our societies over the last five hundred years. 
  The course is grouped around three themes: 
   
   infectious disease 
   chronic disease 
   society's responses to disease 
   
  Lectures in the first two sections focus on exploring the origins of key diseases/debilities, the ways in which social structures/behaviours have caused or abetted these conditions, and their impacts on society, economics, politics and culture. 
  In the final section, lectures focus more on the ways in which societies have sought to conceptualise, control and cure diseases. The key questions that students should be able to answer by the end is how have diseases and debilities shaped human societies, and how have human societies shaped diseases and debilities? 
 
 History of Scotland 1700-1832
  
  This course will explore Scotland’s political, economic, religious, intellectual and social development in the aftermath of the Union of 1707 through to 1832.   The benefits, disadvantages and tensions that arose from the process of becoming part of the British state will be explored through such issues as: 
   
   causes and impact of union 
   the significance of Jacobitism 
   the nature and consequence of agricultural and industrial change 
   Empire 
   the role of the Scottish Enlightenment. 
   
 
 Modern Europe
  
  This class examines some of the principal developments in international history of twentieth century Europe. It pays particular attention to: 
   
   the causes of the First World War 
   the impact of the war upon the international system 
   the rise of new powers within the international community after 1919 
   the causes of the Second World War 
   the Cold War and the forces driving European integration since 1945 
   the role of the USA and USSR in recent European history 
   In terms of geographical coverage the class will seek to balance consideration of Europe-wide developments with finer-focus treatment of French, Italian and German history. The class will introduce students to some of the main debates in the academic literature and encourage them to look at a range of relevant primary sources.
   
  
 Psychology 
 Cognition & Neuropsychology
  
  This class reveals how our understanding of higher mental functions has been enhanced through: 
   
   theoretical and experimental studies of normal human cognition 
   neuropsychological studies of how cognitive functions may be damaged as a result of brain lesions 
   Topics covered include disorders of the perceptual system, memory and attention, and the role of the frontal lobes in planning, motivation, emotion, and personality. 
 
 Social & Health Psychology
  
  This class introduces social psychological theories and research that provide insights into why people believe what they believe, and why they behave the way they do. 
  Topics covered include attribution theory, aggression, prosocial behaviour, group influence, norms, conformity, obedience, and attitudes. 
  It ends with an introduction to health psychology, demonstrating how social psychological principles covered earlier in the class are applied to pressing, real-world health issues such as dietary behaviour, smoking/alcohol-use, and suicide. 
 
 Introduction to Research Design & Analysis
  
  You'll be introduced to the main features of measurement, research design, and statistical analysis in psychology. 
  Following a general introduction, the course presents fundamental concepts, issues, and debates in the field of research methods. 
  You'll also become familiarised with the conceptual basis for inferential statistical testing, and introduced to different inferential statistics. Finally, a brief introduction to qualitative research methods takes place. 
 
 Year 3 
 History 
 Oral History: Theory and Practice
  
  Please note that this is compulsory for students who wish to use oral history in their dissertation. 
  Oral history is a way of engaging with the past via the experiences and memories of those who were there. ‘Oral history’ is a multifaceted term that refers to the sources (interviews), the methodology (interviewing), theory (analysis), and products (of which there are many). 
  This new class aims to alert students to the possibilities of using oral history as a way of understanding the past. It will examine key concepts and methodologies in oral history and explore how oral history has helped to shape historical understanding. 
  This class also has an important practice-based focus – students taking the class will gain an opportunity to develop practical skills in oral history interviewing and analysis as well as to reflect critically on theory in relation to practice. They will also get an opportunity to explore the application and use of history in the public arena through engaging with work on oral history and public history. 
  Because of the practical nature of this class and the limited supply of equipment, numbers are capped at 25. 
 
 Religion behind the Iron Curtain
  
  This class will explore Church-State relations, together with the dilemmas faced by ordinary Christians and Communists, in a number of ‘satellite’ countries of East-Central Europe during half a century of Cold War.   Seminar topics will include: 
   
   the show trial of so-called ‘Vatican agents’ in Prague and Bratislava 
   a ‘miracle’ faked by the Secret Police 
   the case of a cardinal who took refuge in the US Embassy in Budapest 
   the election of a Polish Pope and the spirituality of the Polish Solidarity movement. 
   You should take this class if you want to engage imaginatively with both Communist and Catholic perspectives of the post-war period, read independently from a wide variety of primary sources and participate fully in seminar discussion and debate. 
 
 Disability in Modern Britain
  
  The aim of this class is for to gain an understanding of the key role that disability plays in the study of the historical past. 
  The class will explore the ways in which disability has been defined, treated and experienced. It will place developments in disability policy within wider social, cultural and political contexts. Students will engage with, and think critically about, primary sources ranging from official papers, newspaper articles, and oral testimonies, in addition to relevant secondary source material. 
  The use of oral testimonies in particular will help students to consider the lived experiences of disabled people and the ways in which society sought to define and treat disability.   
 
 Medicine & Warfare
  
  This class explores the role that health and medicine has played in the major wars of the twentieth century. In particular, it considers the vital contribution that medicine has made to manpower economy, discipline and morale. 
  Focusing predominantly on Britain, the USA and Europe, the class analyses the ways that different countries have responded to the medical issues posed by modern warfare in both military and civilian contexts. As such, it considers issues such as wartime disability, welfare provision, occupational health and psychiatry, and explores the role that military doctors, women and humanitarian organisations have played in shaping medical responses to war. 
  The key objective of this class is to place military-medical developments within their wider social, cultural and political contexts and to examine the impact of military health and medicine on the lived experience of war. 
 
 France at War
  
  The class begins with the traumatic episodes of the Franco-Prussian War and the Communes of 1871. By analysing the often problematic political and cultural consolidation of the Third Republic, this class will explore the ‘culture wars’ and the internal divisions that culminated in the Dreyfus Affair. After the humiliation of losing its status as Europe’s dominant power, France sought greatness in colonial expansion in Africa and Indochina, while seeking to consolidate national identity by transforming ‘peasants into Frenchmen’. 
  You'll explore the experiences of the First World War, assessing the strength of French unity in the face of the German enemy. The interwar clashes between fascism and the Popular Front will then be examined and how the First World War impacted upon French foreign policy and attitudes towards future war. 
  You'll spend three weeks exploring the enduring controversies of the Second World War, focusing upon the collapse, resistance, collaboration, and French involvement in the persecution of the Jews, as France faced its ‘hereditary enemy’ once again. 
  The class concludes with an analysis of the French withdrawal from Indochina and Algeria and an assessment of France’s position in the post-war global order. 
  A variety of sources will be explored throughout the class, including paintings, monuments, films, literary sources, newspaper reports, memoirs and archival documents.   
 
 Propaganda & War in the Twentieth Century
  
  This class examines means by which states conduct informal activities to promote their domestic and foreign objectives during wartime. In particular, it analyses the role of propaganda throughout the twentieth century, focusing on the use of modern mass communication and technology by states involved in conflicts. 
  The class is structured around a number of historical themes, which help shed light on the emergence of propaganda as an important means of modern warfare. Key themes analysed throughout the course include: 
   
   the First World War as the first ‘total war’ 
   the growth of international radio broadcasting 
   the creation of centralised propaganda machines in Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union 
   home-front propaganda during the Second World War 
   propaganda, disinformation and the Cold War 
   the United States and the experience of Vietnam 
   information, media coverage and the Gulf War 
   9/11 and the war on terrorism 
   During seminars, students will be exposed to relevant primary source material. Particular attention will be given to understanding the theory and practice of propaganda and analysing how technological developments have contributed to shaping modern information and mass persuasion.
   
 
 Historiography
  
  This class is compulsory for students who want to study history at Honours level.﻿ 
  This class will introduce students to the methods used by historians to reconstruct the past, exploring and analysing the techniques used by historians in doing primary research. The class is designed to demonstrate how students can use these techniques in their own work, particularly their 4th year/Honours dissertation. 
  Among the topics that will be covered are: 
   
   constructing bibliographies 
   using evidence 
   using academic conventions 
   constructing research plans 
   writing historical prose 
   The class will also introduce students to the subject of historiography – the history of history – and the ways in which our understanding and construction of history has evolved. The class is designed to promote independent learning and encourage students to reflect more deeply on the subject matter. 
 
 Communism in Practice: the Case of Czechoslovakia
  
  Czechoslovakia, the last post-war European country to fall behind the Iron Curtain, was exceptional in allying itself to the Soviet Union voluntarily and in bringing its own Communists to power more or less democratically. Confident at first that it would be able to pursue its own path to socialism, the Czechoslovak Communist Party soon became one of the most rigidly Stalinist of all the Soviet satellites. The same Party which, in the 1950s, held some of the most notorious show-trials and put up the largest statue of Stalin to be found anywhere in the world, became, in the 1960s, the author of 'Socialism with a Human Face', a package of attempted economic and political reforms explosive enough to end in the country’s invasion by most of its Warsaw Pact allies. 
  This class will seek to move beyond the stereotypes and oversimplifications of Communism passed down by Cold War rhetoric to explore the shifting nature of Communist thought, power politics and international relations in this most perplexing of times in the history of Central Europe. 
 
 Genocide in the 20th Century
  
  The objectives of this class include introducing students to recent examples of genocide and related mass atrocities, and writing and thinking about these cases in a critical and engaged manner through analysis of primary and secondary materials. 
  Students will be introduced to historical, sociological, anthropological, and legal perspectives related to the occurrence of genocide and related atrocity crimes. Using case studies from the 20th century, we'll discuss: 
   
   contemporary issues related to the labelling of cases 
   the evolution of international legal, diplomatic, economic and military measures to prevent, interdict and punish atrocity crimes 
   the phenomenon of genocide denial 
   the politics of commemoration 
   the lingering legacies of violence on individuals and communities in the post-genocide period 
   
  Case studies will include clear-cut (recognized in international humanitarian law) examples of genocide, including: 
   
   the Armenian genocide 
   the Holocaust in Nazi-occupied Europe 
   the 1994 Rwandan genocide 
   
  Less clear-cut examples will also be looked at, such as: 
   
   Canada’s Residential School System 
   Stalinist crimes in Soviet Russia 
   Khmer Rouge atrocities in Cambodia 
   the scorched earth policies in Guatemala 
   ethnic cleansing surrounding the Bosnian War. 
   
 
 Society and Politics in Colonial India: 1880s-1947
  
  This class will cover the political developments and social groups from the late-nineteenth century till the decolonisation of South Asia in 1947. 
  This is a key period in the social and political history of modern South Asia as it witnessed the growth of a mass-based anti-colonial struggle.   Simultaneously, the involvement of different social groups in this process led to the emergence of community and caste based identity politics.   Under pressure from demands for independence, the colonial state initiated a process of phased devolution of power, and decolonisation after the Second World War.   The class will compare these developments to raise questions about the 'modernity' of colonial society and polity.   The class will analyse how different social groups - such as the peasantry, the working class and tribal groups - participated in and shaped political movements in South Asia. 
  Students will also be encouraged to use the regional perspective of South Asian history to understand the different expressions of class, gender and ethnicity in non-Western societies. 
 
 Scotland’s Highland Problem
  
  Historiography had tended to isolate Highland history from Scottish political development during the late medieval and early modern periods.   This class will re-address this trend, emphasising the Highlands as an integral part of Scottish society, at the same time exploring the division within Scotland between the ‘barbaric’ Highlands and the ‘civil’ Lowlands. 
  Students will study the nature and structure of clan society and place Highland events within the wider context of national and British politics during the sixteenth century.   While relations between the Scottish crown and its Highland subjects is the key theme of this class, students will analyse the extent to which such relations changed through time, and why. 
  The class will also highlight divergent policies within clan society itself, a factor which warns against treating the Highlands as a homogenous whole, instead taking into consideration regional, local and personal biases.    
 
 Scottish Society since 1914
  
  The class provides a broad survey of Scottish social history since 1914. The aim of this class is to explore the nature and development of Scottish society in the twentieth century by assessing the impact of industrialisation and the problems associated with de-industrialisation, as well as the development of an urban society. 
  By the end, the successful student should have expanded their knowledge of contemporary Scottish history and have a good idea of the diversity of issues, techniques and arguments which historians have deployed in the study of twentieth-century Scotland. Among the themes to be covered are: 
   
   the extent to which Scotland had a recognisable culture and identity 
   the myths and realities of 'Red Clydeside' 
   the notion that Scotland was a more intensely patriarchal society than the rest of Britain 
   the idea that Scotland was an anti-immigrant, racist and religiously intolerant society 
   
  
 Psychology 
 Research Methods in Psychology
  
  This class builds on year 2 and equips you with a broader, more advanced set of methodological and analytic skills. These skills are essential for carrying out the year 4 dissertation and for being able to read and understand articles published in academic journals. 
 
 Individual Differences
  
  You're encouraged to think scientifically about conceptual and practical issues related to the study of individual differences, with specific reference to intelligence and personality. You'll gain the chance to put this knowledge into practice by designing your own measurement instrument. 
 
 Cognition
  
  You'll be introduced to some of the core topics in cognitive psychology 
   
   Perception and action, particularly how we perceive time and recognise faces 
   Memory and learning, including models of episodic and working memory 
   Language,  including word production, sentence comprehension, and discourse processing 
   Thinking,  specifically problem solving, deductive reasoning and judgement and decision making. 
   
 
 Development
  
  This class reviews the ways that children develop from infancy right through to the end of adolescence. Key theories are presented and used to explore the extent to which children’s development is continuous or stage-like and whether specific skills develop more quickly than others. Issues relating to infancy, ‘theory of mind’ (understanding others’ thoughts and beliefs), executive function (planning and monitoring abilities), language, and communication form the core themes in the class. 
 
 Psychobiology
  
  The purpose of this class is to provide the opportunity for you to learn the basic principles of brain function, and to encourage you to address the implications of this understanding for their own view of how behaviour is generated. It includes coverage of electrophysiology and psychopharmacology, neuroanatomy, research methods in neuroscience. There are focused sections relating to the visual system and the motor system. 
 
 Social Psychology
  
  This class allows you to consider current ideas and positions within social psychology. Four themes drive the class 
   
   Attitudes and attitude change, covering the Theory of Planned Behaviour and the Health Belief Model 
   Identity, with a focus on social, personal and group identities 
   Prejudice, connecting both attitudes and identities, and covering a broad range of areas such as social representations, stereotyping, prejudice and conflict 
   Epistemology, where consideration is given to the theory of knowledge, how social psychological knowledge is produced, and to what effect 
   
 
 Year 4 
 History 
 Compulsory classes
 Special subject classes (taught over both Semesters 1 & 2)
 The Scramble for the Middle East: Arab Nationalism, Zionism and European Colonial Powers, 1914-1939 
  
  The interwar years are central to any analysis of the decline of European colonial rule in the Middle East and the formation of nation states. It was in the 1920s and 1930s that British and French mandatory authorities faced the emergence of nationalist movements throughout the Arab world as well as the increasing competition and penetration of hostile forces. 
  Students will examine historical themes and events that are significant to the development of political and cultural identities in the Middle East. Through the analysis of primary sources, students will focus on: 
   
   the debate surrounding British and French colonial practices 
   the emergence of the Zionist movement and the creation of a Jewish home in Palestine 
   the radicalisation of Arab nationalism and its impact upon the relations between local political elites and European colonial powers 
   the increasing tension between Jewish and Arab communities in Palestine 
   the creation of the mandates in Palestine, Transjordan, Syria and Lebanon and the process that led to the independence of Egypt and Iraq 
   the challenge brought by German and Italian subversive activities to British and French strategic interests in the region 
   
 
 Twentieth-Century Czechoslovakia
  
  The class will explore major themes in twentieth-century European history: 
   
   the post-World War I settlement 
   the rise of fascism 
   the origins and course of the Second World War, Soviet expansion, the Cold War, the social and political revolutions of the 1960s and the waning of the Soviet Union in the 1980s and 1990s -- from the perspective of a central European country which was created in 1918, dissolved in 1993, and whose opinions were seldom taken into account by the Great Powers. 
   
  Students will obtain a solid grounding in the history of Czechoslovakia from its creation to its dissolution. The class should also offer a useful introduction to themes in twentieth-century European history more generally. 
  Independent reading will concentrate heavily on source material, enabling students to taste the excitement as well as the frustrations of historical research. By being encouraged to view European affairs from a Czech perspective while at the same time having special responsibility for one other European country, students will be led to consider the problems of historical bias and subjectivity, and should develop historical empathy as well as considerable sensitivity to the complexity of international affairs. 
 
 Rwanda: Peace, Conflict & the Politics
  
  The purpose of this special subject is to introduce students to the study of peace and conflict, broadly defined, and to encourage them to write and think about these subjects in a critical and engaged manner informed first and foremost by history-based discourse, but also borrowing from political science, anthropology, and related disciplines. 
  The module will focus on the case study of Rwanda, with individual classes proceeding chronologically. 
  The first semester will cover the pre-colonial period to the start of the second Hutu Republic in 1973, while the second semester will cover 1973 to present. 
  Throughout, students will analyse relevant primary and secondary sources to explore the benefits of applying a historical lens to understanding a nation whose recent history includes both periods of peace and political stability, and several manifestations of state-sanctioned violence, including colonialism, small-scale ethnic, regional, and political conflicts, civil war, genocide, and authoritarianism. 
  Students seeking careers in human rights advocacy, international law, diplomacy, and journalism will also find this course particularly relevant. 
 
 Plantation in Ulster
  
  This class will explore the plantations that took place in Ulster during the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. 
  Students will examine the emergence of the idea for plantation in Ireland, why Ulster was regarded as suitable for plantation, and the various endeavours by English and Scots to settle in the north of Ireland, whether by private enterprise or by the state. This will culminate in the official Plantation of Ulster, a 'British' project initiated by James VI and I in the early years of his reign as king of England, Ireland and Scotland. 
  Students will also look at a couple of cases studies of individuals who were involved in plantation, enabling a detailed study of the political, social, economic and confessional reasons why they chose to migrate to and settle in Ireland at this time. 
  
 Elective classes
 France at War, 1870-1962
  
  The class begins with the traumatic episodes of the Franco-Prussian War and the Communes of 1871. By analysing the often problematic political and cultural consolidation of the Third Republic, this class will explore the ‘culture wars’ and the internal divisions that culminated in the Dreyfus Affair. After the humiliation of losing its status as Europe’s dominant power, France sought greatness in colonial expansion in Africa and Indochina, while seeking to consolidate national identity by transforming ‘peasants into Frenchmen’. 
  You'll explore the experiences of the First World War, assessing the strength of French unity in the face of the German enemy. The interwar clashes between fascism and the Popular Front will then be examined and how the First World War impacted upon French foreign policy and attitudes towards future war. 
  You'll spend three weeks exploring the enduring controversies of the Second World War, focusing upon the collapse, resistance, collaboration, and French involvement in the persecution of the Jews, as France faced its ‘hereditary enemy’ once again. 
  The class concludes with an analysis of the French withdrawal from Indochina and Algeria and an assessment of France’s position in the post-war global order. 
  A variety of sources will be explored throughout the class, including paintings, monuments, films, literary sources, newspaper reports, memoirs and archival documents. 
 
 Medicine & Warfare in the Twentieth Century
  
  This class explores the role that health and medicine has played in the major wars of the twentieth century. In particular, it considers the vital contribution that medicine has made to manpower economy, discipline and morale. 
  Focusing predominantly on Britain, the USA and Europe, the class analyses the ways that different countries have responded to the medical issues posed by modern warfare in both military and civilian contexts. As such, it considers issues such as wartime disability, welfare provision, occupational health and psychiatry, and explores the role that military doctors, women and humanitarian organisations have played in shaping medical responses to war. 
  The key objective of this class is to place military-medical developments within their wider social, cultural and political contexts and to examine the impact of military health and medicine on the lived experience of war. 
 
 Religion behind the Iron Curtain
  
  This class will explore Church-State relations, together with the dilemmas faced by ordinary Christians and Communists, in a number of ‘satellite’ countries of East-Central Europe during half a century of Cold War.   Seminar topics will include: 
   
   the show trial of so-called ‘Vatican agents’ in Prague and Bratislava 
   a ‘miracle’ faked by the Secret Police 
   the case of a cardinal who took refuge in the US Embassy in Budapest 
   the election of a Polish Pope and the spirituality of the Polish Solidarity movement. 
   You should take this class if you want to engage imaginatively with both Communist and Catholic perspectives of the post-war period, read independently from a wide variety of primary sources and participate fully in seminar discussion and debate. 
 
 Scottish Society
  
  The class provides a broad survey of Scottish social history since 1914. 
  The aim of this class is to explore the nature and development of Scottish society (and place it in a wider context) and to examine dominant narratives of Scotland and Scots in the twentieth century. 
  By the end, the successful student should have expanded their knowledge of contemporary Scottish history and have a good idea of the diversity of issues, methodologies and arguments which historians have deployed in the study of twentieth-century Scotland.   Among the themes to be covered are: 
   
   gender relations (for example, analysis of the Scottish ‘hard man’ narrative) 
   religion (including sectarianism and secularisation) 
   health and deprivation 
   the arts and culture (including festivals, theatre, cinema and television) 
   industry (and de-industrialisation and its impacts) 
   Overall, this class will explore the extent to which Scotland had a recognisable national culture and identity and assess and deconstruct narratives of Scottish society since 1914. 
 
 Scotland’s Highland Problem
  
  Historiography had tended to isolate Highland history from Scottish political development during the late medieval and early modern periods.   This class will re-address this trend, emphasising the Highlands as an integral part of Scottish society, at the same time exploring the division within Scotland between the ‘barbaric’ Highlands and the ‘civil’ Lowlands. 
  Students will study the nature and structure of clan society and place Highland events within the wider context of national and British politics during the sixteenth century.   While relations between the Scottish crown and its Highland subjects is the key theme of this class, students will analyse the extent to which such relations changed through time, and why. 
  The class will also highlight divergent policies within clan society itself, a factor which warns against treating the Highlands as a homogenous whole, instead taking into consideration regional, local and personal biases.    
 
 Communism in Practice: the Case of Czechoslovakia
  
  Czechoslovakia, the last post-war European country to fall behind the Iron Curtain, was exceptional in allying itself to the Soviet Union voluntarily and in bringing its own Communists to power more or less democratically. Confident at first that it would be able to pursue its own path to socialism, the Czechoslovak Communist Party soon became one of the most rigidly Stalinist of all the Soviet satellites. The same Party which, in the 1950s, held some of the most notorious show-trials and put up the largest statue of Stalin to be found anywhere in the world, became, in the 1960s, the author of 'Socialism with a Human Face', a package of attempted economic and political reforms explosive enough to end in the country’s invasion by most of its Warsaw Pact allies. 
  This class will seek to move beyond the stereotypes and oversimplifications of Communism passed down by Cold War rhetoric to explore the shifting nature of Communist thought, power politics and international relations in this most perplexing of times in the history of Central Europe. 
 
 Genocide in the 20th Century
  
  The objectives of this class include introducing students to recent examples of genocide and related mass atrocities, and writing and thinking about these cases in a critical and engaged manner through analysis of primary and secondary materials. 
  Students will be introduced to historical, sociological, anthropological, and legal perspectives related to the occurrence of genocide and related atrocity crimes. Using case studies from the 20th century, we'll discuss: 
   
   contemporary issues related to the labelling of cases 
   the evolution of international legal, diplomatic, economic and military measures to prevent, interdict and punish atrocity crimes 
   the phenomenon of genocide denial 
   the politics of commemoration 
   the lingering legacies of violence on individuals and communities in the post-genocide period 
   
  Case studies will include clear-cut (recognized in international humanitarian law) examples of genocide, including: 
   
   the Armenian genocide 
   the Holocaust in Nazi-occupied Europe 
   the 1994 Rwandan genocide 
   
  Less clear-cut examples will also be looked at, such as: 
   
   Canada’s Residential School System 
   Stalinist crimes in Soviet Russia 
   Khmer Rouge atrocities in Cambodia 
   the scorched earth policies in Guatemala 
   ethnic cleansing surrounding the Bosnian War. 
   
 
 Society & Politics in Colonial India
  
  This class will cover the political developments and social groups from the late-nineteenth century till the decolonisation of South Asia in 1947. 
  This is a key period in the social and political history of modern South Asia as it witnessed the growth of a mass-based anti-colonial struggle.   Simultaneously, the involvement of different social groups in this process led to the emergence of community and caste based identity politics.   Under pressure from demands for independence, the colonial state initiated a process of phased devolution of power, and decolonisation after the Second World War.   The class will compare these developments to raise questions about the 'modernity' of colonial society and polity.   The class will analyse how different social groups - such as the peasantry, the working class and tribal groups - participated in and shaped political movements in South Asia. 
  Students will also be encouraged to use the regional perspective of South Asian history to understand the different expressions of class, gender and ethnicity in non-Western societies. 
  
 Psychology 
 Dissertation in Psychology
  
  The dissertation is an opportunity for you to undertake an original piece of research, closely supervised by a single member of staff. Planning for the dissertation begins in year 3, and dissertations can be of such high standards that they are subsequently published in peer-reviewed academic journals. 
 
 Advanced Organisational Behaviour
  
  This class is offered by the Strathclyde Business School, and draws on current themes in Human Resource Management understood from the perspective of micro-organisational behaviour theory and research. Although the theoretical underpinning of the material covered is primarily about work and organisational issues at the level of individual behaviour in organisations, a contextual understanding of these issues is also encouraged. 
     
 
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice I & II
  
  If you take only one of these classes, you'll choose two of the following topics. 
  If you take both these classes, you're permitted to choose four: 
   
   Qualitative Methods 
   Social Development 
   Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology 
   Cognitive Impairment in Psychological Disorders 
   Practical Aspects of Memory 
   Artificial Intelligence 
   
     
     
  
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice I & II topics﻿
 Qualitative Methods
  
  This class will offer you the opportunity to develop a deeper theoretical and practical understanding of advanced qualitative research methodologies. It aims to support and develop your understanding of the epistemological and theoretical assumptions behind various qualitative methodologies, specifically: 
   
   discourse analysis 
   conversation analysis 
   grounded theory 
   interpretative phenomenological analysis 
   narrative analysis.   
   
 
 Social Development
  
  Social development is a specialised, though broad, area of developmental psychology. It covers the development of all aspects of social behaviour, social influence and social reasoning. This class is intended for students who already have some grounding in developmental psychology and who wish to study advanced topics in depth. 
  Particular attention is paid to the interacting contributions of biological, cognitive and environmental factors. The lecture-based component of the course covers a range of core topics. These include: 
   
   Infant social behaviour and understanding 
   attachment 
   aggression 
   gender 
   ethnicity and ethnic attitudes 
   social cognitive development 
   social development in adolescence 
   
 
 Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology
  
  This class will consider the historical and conceptual development of Psychoanalytic Personality Psychology, tracing its development from Freud’s work, through the work of the early Object Relations theorists, to modern approaches to Object Relations and Attachment theory. 
  It aims to critically assess the contribution that Psychoanalytic and Attachment theorists and practitioners can make to understanding personality. It promotes theoretical insight and reflective learning by engaging you with nomothetic studies of various aspects of psychoanalytic principles in practice such that links to discussions of theory are established. 
  In addition to lectures, you'll analyse personalities of two notable characters in history, critically assessing what unique insights into their nature's psychoanalytic theory can add to those of approaches rooted in cognitive-behavioural theories. You'll then be further encouraged to identify the links between background literature and the complexity of whole personalities.   
 
 Cognitive Impairment in Psychological Disorders
  
  This class will explore the theoretical underpinnings of the short and long term memory systems (working, episodic, semantic) and related cognitive functions (eg executive functions), the methodological issues relating to their assessment, and how aspects of cognitive function have been implicated in specific clinical disorders. 
  Lectures which explore theoretical models of these memory aspects will be followed up with more specific and applied lectures and class discussions about the role of working memory and other executive functions in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, Williams syndrome, episodic memory in Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, and cognitive control, rumination and memory in depression.   
 
 Practical Aspects of Memory
  
  The focus of this class is to highlight the issue of generalisability of psychological theory with specific reference to memory. This approach encourages you to assess theories, developed in the laboratory, for their generalisability to real life applications, and, thereby, develops their critical analysis skills. 
  The two fields which are considered are forensic and clinical psychology. In the forensic domain the areas covered relate to the accuracy and completeness of eyewitness memory, and the assessment of line-up procedures and interview techniques used by the police, with practical recommendations made as to which situations and contexts certain procedures will be useful. In terms of clinical psychology, we will largely be focusing on the validity of repressed memories, with implications for ethically treating clients, and the important role of context in determining the veracity of a claim of recovered memories.   
 
 Artificial Intelligence
  
  This class will introduce you to some of the core topics in Artificial Intelligence, of both the traditional, symbol-manipulation and the more recent connectionist varieties. AI simulations in the areas of visual perception, language, memory and learning will be discussed to allow the exploration of key theoretical debates. 
  You'll develop an understanding of the relevance of artificial intelligence for psychology, and vice versa, and contrast the ‘analytic’ approach of experimental psychology with the ‘synthetic’ approach of AI.   
 
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice III & IV
  
  If you take only one of these classes, you'll choose two of the following topics. 
  If you take both these classes, you're permitted to choose four: 
   
   Perception & Action 
   Forensic   
   Physiological Psychology 
   Psychology of Language 
   Performance Psychology 
   Health Psychology 
   Neuropsychology of Ageing & Dementia 
   
     
  
 Advanced Psychological Theory & Practice III & IV topics
 Perception & Action
  
  Perception and action is one of the major fields in contemporary cognitive psychology and neuropsychology. This class provides an opportunity for you to explore the field at an advanced level and achieve in-depth understanding of three key areas: 
   
   Theoretical approaches to the problem of perception, paying particular attention to the contrasting perspectives and contemporary debate between ‘information processing’ versus ‘ecological’ theories of perception.   
   The ways in which perceptual information is used in the planning and control of action both in laboratory studies and in ‘real world’ activities such as tennis, cricket, athletics, high-diving and driving.   
   The role of cognitive maps and other representations of space in controlling perceptual activity. How cognitive representations of space are used to navigate around the external environment in children versus adults, and in blind versus sighted people. We also explore some of the spatial representations found in other species and explore how these can give rise to extraordinary spatial abilities. 
   
     
 
 Forensic
  
  This class will consider the historical and conceptual development of forensic psychology. 
  It'll build on your earlier work, specifically on your knowledge of the psychology of individual differences and, more generally, on their skills in applying research methods in psychology. The class aims to critically assess the contribution that forensic psychology researchers and practitioners can make to the criminal justice system. 
  It'll promote theoretical insight and reflective learning by engaging you with both nomothetic and idiographic studies of various aspects of the work of forensic psychologists such that links to discussions of theory are established. In addition to lectures, you'll analyse real examples of the forensic psychologist’s work, specifically by reporting on the psychological dynamics of a police interview, and by applying psychological theory to the analysis of a criminal personality.   
   
 
 Physiological Psychology
  
  The main purpose of this class is to provide a selective overview of the physiological and neural substrates of motivational states. The two motivational states that are covered in this stream are hunger and sexual motivation. To help you understand these two motivational states, a number of other topics have to be covered to provide the required background knowledge: 
   
   evolution 
   the development of   the nervous system including the roles of genes and the environment in development 
   euro-anatomy 
   threats and incentives 
   self-regulation   
   sexual differentiation 
   These topics will be new to you. You must learn new vocabulary and learn about basic physiological processes and neuro-anatomy. You'll also have to integrate this information to think about the psychological implications and consequences of these neural processes.  
   
 
 Psychology of Language
  
  The class will explore some of the key issues in psycholinguistic research such as pragmatic aspects of language use, language development, second language processing. You'll understand some of the key concepts in these areas (eg common ground theory, egocentricity in language processing, language transfer), and will be able to critically evaluate the key scientific findings relating to them. You'll also appreciate the main experimental paradigms/techniques that are used in the field.   
 
 Performance Psychology
  
  Psychological factors are recognised as having an essential role in the attainment of success in all aspect of performance, especially in sport. In this class, issues relating to the psychology of elite performance, individual and group processes and the acquisition of complex motor skills will be examined. The aim of the topic stream is to provide you with an in-depth understanding of: 
   
   Psychology of elite performance 
   The relationships between anxiety and performance will be evaluated, and the ways elite performers cope with the pressure will be assessed 
   Individual and group processes in sport: An evaluation of leadership styles and group and team dynamics will be undertaken 
   Motor skill acquisition and performance: current theoretical issues in the development of skilled motor behaviours will be analysed 
   
     
 
 Health Psychology
  
  You'll be provided with a comprehensive grounding in the theories, methods and evidence base of health psychology. In addition, this class will provide opportunities for you to apply your knowledge to real world health problems. This combination of knowledge and practical application will enable you to make informed judgements about postgraduate study and training within the discipline. It'll also support any effort to gain employment within health related jobs, such as health promotion.   
 
 Neuropsychology of Ageing and Dementia
  
  This class will offer you the opportunity to acquire an in-depth understanding of the theories and empirical data that are relevant within the field of neuropsychology of ageing and dementia. 
  It'll cover the differences between normal and pathological decline in old age and will provide information on the neuropsychological profiles and pathologies which characterise different forms of dementia. 
  You'll learn to identify the features which can aid early diagnosis and differential diagnosis of the dementias (eg for Alzheimer's disease, Frontotemporal dementia, Vascular dementia and Parkinson’s disease dementia, Lewy body dementia). You'll become familiar with how different aspects of cognition are distributed within the brain and will be aware of the consequences of impairment. Different methodologies that are used for the study of the dementias will be explored (eg neuropsychological assessment, functional and structural neuroimaging) and you'll learn to critically evaluate the benefits and pitfalls of each method. 
     
  
 Study abroad
 Erasmus International Work Placement
  
  This class is an option which is available to a restricted number of students who'll apply to take part. It involves a placement with a European University partner working in a research team during the summer between years 3 and 4. Additional assessment is the completed during semester 1 of year 4. 
  
 