Course content 
 Year 1 
 Education 
 Understanding Education in the 21st Century
  
  This class introduces students to a large and rich seam of disciplinary knowledge. It is an introductory class of potential interest to all who want to understand more about Education. Some of the key content to be addressed in the module is around the following: 
   
   the field of study that is education: what it is and how we know that 
   the context of education: some contribution of political, historical and economic dimensions to curriculum, schooling, policy, globalisation 
   education achievement: some contributions of psychological, sociological and philosophical perspectives to topics such as learning, diversity, gender 
   
 
 Placement & Curriculum
  
  On this module, students from across disciplines work together to learn  about  children and the  communities in which they live; children's health and wellbeing; child protection; children's voice;  children's play and  play places. The notion  that the  health and wellbeing of children and young people is central to the advancement of society is a seminal theme in this module.   
  The placement experience has been designed to allow students to undertake a work placement with children and young people from 0 - 14 years.   Placements  will be  provided  in a range of settings outwith the mainstream classroom. 
  
 Social policy 
 Social Policy & Society in Contemporary Scotland
  
  This class is designed to introduce you to some of the major issues confronting Scottish society and to provide an accessible introduction to some of the key concerns of Social Policy.   It will examine a range of issues, including questions of poverty and inequality, social divisions, health, housing, education, and criminal justice. 
 
 Private Issues & Public Problems
  
  This class examines the different ways in which ‘private issues’ become recognised as ‘public problems’.   Using a number of different case studies, such as domestic violence, homelessness or poverty, it will look at the different ways in which social problems have been identified and at the different standpoints from which they can be viewed. 
 
 Year 2 
 Education 
 Learners & Learning
 
   This class provides students with an essential understanding of human learning processes and the needs of learners across the life-course. 
 
 Informal Education
 
   This module investigates philosophical and pedagogical interventions beyond the school curriculum in informal settings, with adults in particular. It'll also open up possibilities for informal education techniques and practices to be considered and adopted by a range of professions and to explore potential partnerships between informal education specialists and others. 
  
 Social policy 
 Scottish Social Policy since 1845
  
  This class explores some of the different ways in which social policy has evolved in Scotland in response to a variety of social problems since the introduction of the Scottish Poor Law Act in 1845. It covers all the main areas of social policy, including health, housing, education and poverty, and also explores the changing boundaries between individuals, families, communities, voluntary organisations, commercial welfare and state over the course of this period. 
 
 Key Concepts in Social Welfare
  
  This class explores some of the most important concepts in the academic study of Social Policy, including such concepts as equality, justice, need, happiness, poverty and wellbeing. It also examines a number of different ideological perspectives on these issues, such as liberalism, conservatism, socialism, social democracy, Marxism, feminism and the New Right. 
 
 The Making of Social Policy
  
  This class examines the ways in which social policies are ‘made’ at both a national and international level.   It examines the roles played by different actors, institutions and ideas.   It also looks at the ways in which evidence is used to inform policy-making, and at the ways in which we are all involved, as citizens, in the policy process.   These themes are explored with the aid of a series of case-studies, including health and education policies, and the development and implementation of equalities legislation. 
 
 Year 3 
 Education 
 History & Philosophy of Education
  
  This module will support students in developing their knowledge and understanding of the roots of some key educational ideas in history. These will be considered from a philosophical perspective. 
 
 Children & Childhood
  
  This module will focus on children and childhood in contexts other than formal education settings that will be explored elsewhere. The aim of this module is to introduce students to the concepts of child and childhood through a range representations. The class will draw on children in film, art and literature to explore representations of children and childhood and experiences of childhood. 
 
 Social Pedagogy with Adults
  
  This module is based on an understanding of the evolution of adult learning and the resultant principles that underline current practice and will illustrate how adult educators work and will also open up possibilities for adult education techniques and practices to be considered. It'll also explore potential partnerships between adult educators and others. 
  
 Social policy
 Compulsory classes: 
 Research Skills in Social Policy
  
  This class will help you to develop your knowledge and understanding of some of the key methods used by researchers in the field of social policy.   It will introduce you to a number of different qualitative and quantitative methods, and to some of the basic principles of research design.   It will provide an essential foundation for your final-year dissertation.﻿ 
 
 Scottish Social Welfare in a UK Context
  
  This class examines the ways in which recent political developments have placed questions of social policy at the heart of debates over the future of the United Kingdom.   To what extent do the different parts of the UK face different social problems?   To what extent do different parts of the UK possess a different approach to the resolution of these issues?   How has the governance of social policy in different parts of the UK been affected by its current constitutional arrangements? 
 
 Year 4 
 Education 
 Dissertation
  
  The Dissertation in Education is designed to further students’ development of a questioning, self-evaluative and reflective approach in a major in-depth piece of work demanding independent, self-motivated study and the sustained application of professional research and enquiry skills. 
  The widest possible range of topics, types of project, modes of enquiry and of research techniques is encouraged. What projects have in common is the individual student’s ownership and control of the project and the expectation of high quality work. 
  
 
 Choose from the following:﻿
  
 Policy & Politics in Education
  
  This class will provide students with the opportunity to engage in debate about current issues in education through detailed exploration of the policy and political contexts. It will introduce students to frameworks for understanding how policy comes about and how it is inextricably linked with political issues. 
 
 Social Issues in Education
  
  This module will teach students about the responsibility of teachers for the education, health and well-being of all children, in the context of a complex and diverse society.   It will also address the needs of those who will work with children, young people and adults in a variety of education-related contexts through its focus on a range of key social issues and the relevant national legislative and policy framework. 
 
 Social Research Methods (10-credit module)
  
  This module prepares students for designing and completing a research project. It will equip students with the skills and knowledge required in planning and delivering a research project. 
  
 Social policy
 
 Compulsory classes:
  
 The Welfare State in Comparative Perspective
  
  This class examines the development of welfare states as a global phenomenon.   It asks what we mean by the concept of a ‘welfare state’ and looks at the ways in which welfare states have developed in different countries.   It also explores some of the major differences between different types of welfare state, using the concept of ‘welfare r&eacute;gimes’. 
 
 Dissertation
  
  Many students find that the dissertation is the most fulfilling part of their degree. It will provide you with the opportunity to undertake your own in-depth investigation into a topic of your choice, and to develop skills as an independent researcher. 
  
 