Course content 
 Year 1 
 Management Development Programme 1 
  
  Topics 
  First Year aims to help you make the transition to the university context. Semester 1 is the Thematic Semester: The World of Business Today and covers topics such as: 
   
   Social-Ethical-Environmental Governance (SEEG) 
   Business Ethics 
   Disruptive Technologies 
   
  Semester 2: Functional Semester: Organisations Today covers topics such as: 
   
   Creativity & Responsibility 
   Marketing & Sustainability across Domains 
   
  Class description 
  The first year of the programme is centred on the construction of knowledge in classroom setting with theoretical constructs developed. For each topic we’ve recorded a video by a Strathclyde academic who is a leading expert in the field. 
  You’ll watch these lectures in advance of each session and complete a pre-sessional activity. The pre-sessional work then forms the basis of team based activities work in the classroom (groups of 50 and teams of six-seven) where you develop an agreed understanding of the topic and present this to the group. 
  The feedback gained from this activity then feeds directly into the assessment for the block. You’ll complete 16 assignments in the two semesters of the class. 
  
 Economics 
 Introduction to Economics
  
  The purpose of this class is to provide you with a balanced introduction to economics which will be at once self-contained and lay the foundation for further study in economics and more generally. The work of the class will be based on a programme of systematic directed reading, supplemented by tutorials, using group projects and in-class short answer tests as cumulative assessment. 
  
 Management 
 Managing in a Global Context
  
  This class will introduce you to the concept of the organisation and the manager’s role within it. It will further provide the grounding required to prepare you for the more complex and specialised subject matter to come both in general management and in international business.   
 
 Year 2 
 Management Development Programme 2 
  
  Topics 
  Semester 1 topics include: 
   
   Working in Business Organisations 
   Working Business Research & Consultancy 
   Working Internationally 
   Working in the Third Sector 
   Rhetorics & Oratory 
   
  Semester 2 is about developing the proposal of MDP3; with a presentation and a final report. 
  Class description 
  The second year concentrates on developing understanding through industry-specific contextualisation. Sessions are weekly and three hours in length. 
  The sessions are thematically linked to the pathways for individualised experience in third year whilst also drawing on the theoretical knowledge developed in MDP 1. In order to develop understanding, organisations will deliver a half-day session. This consists of a one hour plenary introduction where the company and case study are introduced. This is followed by the group sessions where you undertake activities in relation to the case study set by the company. 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 2
  
  This is the core microeconomics class in second year. It aims to develop your understanding of: the concepts of consumer choice; the motives of the firm and profit maximisation; the market and its role in achieving equilibrium prices and quantities; and the implications of market power. It will introduce you to mathematical techniques commonplace in economics, giving you the ability to apply these in a wider economic context. 
     
 
 Macroeconomics 2
 
   The class builds upon the macroeconomic foundations established in the first year Economics class and both extends and deepens analysis. In particular this class will develop your ability to use key macroeconomic models and will also provide an introduction to the analysis of economic data. 
  
 Management 
 Organisational Analysis & Strategy
  
  This class will analyse contemporary management and organisation by examining the different ways of ‘doing business’ implied by different organisational forms. This approach to organisational analysis suggests that too often the study of management and organisation fails to recognise the importance of different structural forms in the evaluation of management and organisation. The argument to be developed throughout the class is that there is a need to engage in structural analyses of organisations and to understand better the relationship of organisations to the wider structures in which they are embedded and how this impacts upon both the strategic direction but also the day-to-day management of a business. 
 
 Understanding Change in Organisations
  
  This class recognises that change permeates all aspects of organisational life and that understanding change is crucial to effective management.   It'll familiarise students with the implications for change of a world that is increasingly globalised and internationalised, where public, private and 3rd sector organisations are often in continuous upheaval due to turbulent economies, to reforming imperatives, and radical new technologies. 
 
 Year 3 
 Management Development Programme 3
  
  The third year of centres on individualised experience in an organisational context through one of the following pathways: 
   
   Internship/Charities - gain practical experience in a private or third sector organisation. You need to negotiate and locate your own organisation and experience – this is one of the key learning points of the pathway. 
   Research and consultancy - a facility for local small businesses to gain from the experience and expertise of those within SBS. You work on two live business consultancy projects (one in each semester) and, as a team of 6, develop solutions and strategic initiatives for the local SME economy. 
   International experience – only available for students who are undertaking an international exchange for either one semester or full year. 
   Vertically Integrated Projects - working on a cross-faculty basis to research longitudinal projects (including the ‘Bill Gates Toilet Challenge, Solar Panels for Gambia and Enterprise in Schools) you work with a team of students from all levels of study (first year undergraduate to final year PhD) to further the work of the project. 
   
  In addition, you’re required to undertake a social responsibility element (this accounts for one quarter of the overall workload). 
  These have been designed to provide support to the Curriculum for Excellence and the Widening Access to Higher Education programme. There are no formal classes for MDP3 although there is pathway support with the pathway leads and tutor support. 
  
 Economics 
 Microeconomics 3
  
  Adam Smith's hidden hand - markets result in efficient outcomes - doesn't always work. We seek to understand why through the study of market power, externalities and public goods, and then go on to apply these ideas to issues of education, healthcare provision and crime and punishment. 
 
 Macroeconomics 3
 
   This class builds on the Macroeconomics you studied in second year by covering four topics in detail: (i) models of economic growth; (ii) the effects of macroeconomic policy in an open economy; (iii) the interrelationships between money growth, output, unemployment and inflation; and (iv) the implications of high government debt. 
  
 Management 
 Developing Theory into Practice
  
  In order to work effectively in organisations and manage complex, multi-faceted situations, managers need to develop their abilities to work with management theories to inform their practice and vice versa. Managers need to know what constitutes good or best practice, for which they need the skills of critical reflexivity. This means they can adapt their theories in use for specific situations. This class seeks to develop the skills of critical reflexivity so that students can become more aware of their own learning process and how to apply them in context. 
 
 Management Industry Placement
  
  This class provides students with the opportunity to gain first-hand experience working with business professionals, to develop practical and reflective skills in an industry context, and to build networks for possible future work and learning. It also provides the opportunity to apply theories studied in other classes to the analysis and interpretation of industry practices.   
 
 Contemporary Trends in Management Practice
  
  Management trends and fashions have been increasingly deployed in organisational practice and scrutinised in scholarly contexts over the last thirty years. Many of these practices, often referred to as ideas, tools and methods, have gained fashion status, waxing and waning in popularity over time. A large number of them have failed in practice largely due to unrealistic expectations and the complexity of organisational contexts in which they are adopted. This class is based upon student requests to learn more about contemporary management trends and the social and political factors which facilitate and undermine their application.   
 
 Year 4 
 Economics 
 Dissertation 
 
   The dissertation is an important part of the fourth year programme. Single Honours Economics BA students are required to submit a dissertation in Economics while Joint Honours BA students may submit a dissertation in Economics or in their other Honours subject. 
  
 Elective classes
 Microeconomics 4
  
  Game Theory and  Information Economics, the topics of this class, consider market failure  resulting from two different sources: individuals pursuing their own  self-interest at the  expense of others; and information asymmetry which alters  the way agents behave.  Methods to alleviate these market failures will also be  considered. 
 
 Introduction to Econometrics
  
  This class builds upon the empirical content of Macroeconomics 2 and further develops your ability to analyse economic data. In addition, this class lays the foundations for further study of econometrics at Honours level. 
 
 Economics of Firms & Industries 
  
  This class introduces you to different industry structures and studies the behaviour of firms within those structures.   The material builds on the study of the theory of the firm presented in Microeconomics 2 and provides a foundation for the study of industrial organisation at Honours level. 
 
 Industrial Economics
 
   This course investigates the actions that firms in an industry might take to preserve their profit in that industry, and the implications that this has for competition policy and regulation. We take an analytical approach to the issues which will be supported by examining case studies and current events. 
 
 Applied Econometrics
  
  In the third year econometrics class you’ll have learned about regression in both a cross-sectional data and time series data context. This class extends that knowledge in three ways. 
  First, for cross-sectional data, the class deals with regression techniques where the dependent variable may be restricted or limited in some way. In such cases, the regression model as taught in the third year class is not appropriate; this class develops models which are similar in spirit to the standard regression model, but can handle all of these cases. 
  A second purpose of Applied Econometrics is to develop regression methods which can be used when you have panel data - consisting of both cross-sectional and time-series dimensions. 
  Third, the class will build on the introduction to the econometrics of time series data developed in this class by developing two classes of models. 
 
 Financial Development & Economic Growth
  
  This class gives a balanced view of the role of finance in promoting long-run economic growth, but also booms and busts. The nature and role of financial intermediaries will be introduced, and, afterwards, formally addressed in a simple aggregate growth model. Empirical evidence will be examined, before turning to the specificities of micro-finance. The importance of financial globalisation will also be investigated. Finally, the rest of the class will be devoted to deciphering the causes and consequences of the current financial crisis. 
 
 Behavioural Economics
  
  Behavioural Economics offers alternative theories that merge psychological insights with economic theory and are based on experimental and other evidence, that attempt to provide a better explanation of real-world behaviour. 
  This class is concerned with exploring these new behavioural theories with the aim of providing you with an expanded toolkit with which to approach ‘real-world Economics’ that is based on the burgeoning Behavioural Economics literature that has emerged over the past two or three decades. 
  After studying this, you should be able to extend much of your previously-learned knowledge in Microeconomics in various directions that take into account more realistic ways of modelling how individuals behave. 
 
 Natural Resource, Environmental & Energy Economics
  
  The module provides you with an introduction to natural resource, environmental and energy economics and policy. It focuses on the contributions of economics to understanding environmental, energy and resource problems, their causes, and the design of effective public policies to counteract them. 
  
 Management 
 Contemporary Issues in Management
  
  This class explores important concepts and debates centred on the working lives of managers. It'll draw on a range of conceptual ideas in organisational analysis to investigate numerous contentious issues that not only lie at the heart of academic debate but also confront managers as they go about their daily lives.   
 
 Strategy & Leadership 
  
  Taking a view that, in practice, strategy is something that people do rather than something organisations have, this class aims to develop understanding and insights into how current and aspiring business leaders can manage strategically. An experiential learning approach, based on exploring case examples through workshops, is adopted to: 
   
   surface insights into the complexities and challenges of being a strategic business leader 
   critically assess the scope and relative merits of different strategic management mechanisms and leadership approaches   
   encourage self-reflection and self-awareness 
   When you complete this class, you'll have an enhanced understanding of how individuals within an organisation can effectively lead and manage strategy in a complex and challenging world.
   
 
 Management, Enterprise & the Rise of the Global Economy
  
  This class embraces three principles of management: 
   
   business strategies and management practices might best be understood through reflection on the complex realities faced by enterprises in competitive arenas at home and abroad 
   firms can only be understood within the context of market dynamics and the economic, social, political and cultural forces bearing upon markets 
   companies and their contemporary situation can never be divorced from their past 
   
 
 Dynamics of Organising
  
  This class will build on Understanding Change in Organisations by developing an advanced view of the processes of organising. The distinctively dynamic character of key theories will be framed in terms of the philosophical contrast between ‘becoming’ and ‘being’ ideas as described by Tsoukas & Chia (2002). Research methodologies that are appropriate for this dynamic approach, such as conversation/discourse analysis, longitudinal and real-time data collection, and issues of researcher reflexivity, will also be explored. Understanding of these dynamic theories of organising will be deepened through application to topics of practical managerial concern such as: strategising, institutional change, identity construction, communities of practice, innovation and creativity, socially constructed change, change leadership, sense making, complex responsive processes, emotions and aesthetics of change.   
 
 Being an Ethical Manager
  
  Given the increased attention on business leaders and the perceived emphasis on corporate social responsibility, this class looks at ethical leadership by focusing on the nature and application of business ethics and contemporary leadership. It raises key ethical issues from both cultural and stakeholder perspectives and balances them with philosophical and pragmatic considerations. It'll provide you with a clear understanding of the dichotomy between philosophical idealism and the pragmatic considerations of ethical leadership and the challenges of ethical decision making.        
  
 