Course content 
 Year 1 
 Politics 
 Politics 1A: Concepts
  
  This class provides an introduction to the study of politics, in particular how modern states around the world work and interact with each other. We devote particular attention to concepts relevant to the systematic study of states in a globally connected world. We will cover a series of key concepts, ranging from the meaning of power, democracy and authoritarianism, to structures and institutions – including elections, referendums and international organisations - that are essential to understanding how modern politics works. 
  Considerable attention is given to the impact of international processes on outcomes in contemporary politics. 
 
 Politics 1B: Government & Governance
  
  This class provides an introduction to the actors, processes and outcomes that are key to modern government and governance. It covers a range of political processes that take place within democratic and non-democratic states and beyond, including for instance the role of the media. Considerable attention is given to the impact of international processes on outcomes in contemporary politics. The class examines a range of outcomes that influence the lives of citizens, including the policies associated with modern welfare states and international trade agreements. 
  
 Journalism & Creative Writing 
 Journalism & Creative Writing 1A 
  
  The class introduces key concepts in the theory and practice of creative writing. During the course of this semester we focus mainly on the exploration and production of short stories.   This module aims to: 
   
   introduce you to the basic skills and techniques involved in writing short fiction 
   develop good practice related to the professional presentation of creative work 
   encourage you to discuss creative work collaboratively and constructively 
   introduce you to the skills involved in reflecting critically on creative products and processes 
   
  You're introduced to core concepts in both journalism and creative writing and explore the connections between the two areas of writing. 
 
 Journalism & Creative Writing 1B 
  
  This class introduces key concepts in the theory and practice of journalism. It focuses mainly on the examination and production of journalism as a form of storytelling. 
  You'll be introduced to the fundamental skills needed to write effective news and features and will have the opportunity to practise these in the workshops. 
 
 Year 2 
 Politics 
 International Relations & Global Politics
  
  This class introduces students to the academic study of International Relations (IR). It examines basic and historical contexts in order to give students a firm grounding in IR. The next part of the course focuses on major theories of IR, which will provide students with conceptual understanding of world affairs. The course then examines the structures and processes within IR, covering topics such as the changing nature of war, international security and international institutions. 
 
 Modern Political Thought
  
  This class provides an introduction to fundamental political concepts, such as justice, democracy, power, authority, liberty and equality. It considers the relationship between the normative evaluation of political systems and how we study them. Students also become familiar with the basic ideologies necessary to understand political debate. 
 
 Comparative Politics
  
  This class focuses on the comparative study of institutions in democratic and authoritarian political systems and what influences their performance and stability. You'll learn what forms economic, social, cultural and political institutions take, and what their effects are on democratic and authoritarian political systems. The underlying theme of the course is the determinants and consequences of democratic and dictatorial institutions. This class enhances that knowledge by outlining research questions about democracy in its various forms and ways they can to be addressed by empirical evidence. 
  
 Journalism & Creative Writing 
 Journalism 2
  
  How we gather news, how we write news and how we consume news is changing. The aim of this class is to introduce you to classic and modern newsgathering methods in the 21st century. That means you'll be combining the best of the old with the most relevant and effective of the new. 
  The foundation stone of journalism is news. That’s what drives newspapers, magazines, TV, radio and online content. So, we’ll be looking at what news is, where it comes from and how we go about gathering it ourselves. The next step is to write news. Therefore, we’ll spend some time examining how best to write news for print and online platforms. 
  The class is a careful mixture of studying journalism and doing journalism because understanding what you are doing and why you are doing it is just as important as learning how to do it. 
 
 Creative Writing 2
  
  You'll study contemporary literature from the perspective of the writer, analysing the craft of writing, as opposed to studying these texts in terms of their historical or cultural context, as you might be familiar with from English Studies classes. 
  The key objective of a creative writing seminar is to begin to understand the mechanics of how contemporary writers put their work together. Some of this analysis will reinforce and build upon lessons learned in first year relating to the basics of structure, tone, narrative, characterisation etc. 
  This class seeks to stretch you further, aiming to achieve a more sophisticated understanding of what makes a good story work. As well as working on short fiction, the class studies a novel and introduces some examples of flash fiction and short fiction. There's also a unit designed to introduce you to the basics of writing good contemporary poetry in free verse style and one that introduces the craft of dramatic writing. 
  The second hour of each class is generally a workshop, with elements of the texts being studied in the first hour used as a platform for writing exercises, group work and discussion in the second hour. Primarily, the second hour of the class focuses on you doing writing of your own. You'll also start to develop rewriting and editing skills.   
 
 Journalism & Creative Writing 2
  
  This class is an introduction to creative nonfiction. It looks at writing that relates to the self, such as autobiography, the diary, the memoir, the lyric essay and beyond. We focus on the way writers have written about themselves and their lives, and will explore how personal experience is transformed into literary and journalistic practice. 
  During the semester you'll develop your own ideas into written assessments. 
 
 Year 3 
 Politics 
 Quantitative Methods in Social Research
  
  The aim of this class is to teach students a range of simple quantitative research methods. Learning these improves your job prospects and equips you better for study in Honours and beyond. It'll also help you better understand the high quantity of statistics published by governments and in the media. 
 
 Research Methods for Political Scientists
  
  In this class you'll learn about different methods of: 
   
   social scientific research 
   reading 
   collecting and analysing data 
   the basic design of quantitative surveys and conducting of qualitative interviews 
   the application of the most widely used statistical software in the social sciences 
   SPSS 
   the basics of uni-variate and bi-variate statistical analysis 
   
  On the basis of the knowledge acquired in this course, students will be able to critically assess the validity and reliability of published research, to develop a research design, and to collect, analyse and present data. 
 
 European Politics
  
  This class provides a comprehensive overview of European politics, identifying the common characteristics of politics and government across the continent, but also the distinguishing features that make individual countries different. 
  Part one examines the emergence and evolution of parties and party systems, focusing on the relationship between parties and society, ideological developments and modernisation processes. Particular attention is given to the emergence of ‘new politics’ and the rise of the far right.   This part of the class concludes with an examination of the different types of electoral system employed in Europe, and the effects they have on politics. 
  Part two focuses on government; the character of government at the centre, multilevel governance, and parliaments. The class combines thematic topics with studies of politics and government in particular countries - France, Germany, Italy, and the countries of eastern and central Europe. 
 
 Chinese Politics
  
  This class will provide a comprehensive overview of Chinese politics since 1949, contextualising it within the study of comparative politics, historical inheritance and contemporary Chinese society. 
  It will give you grounding in the dynamic evolution of the Chinese state and Chinese nationalism, China’s self-identified problems of weakness and underdevelopment, and the difficult political choices faced by political elites. It will also analyse how the country’s Communist legacy offers both opportunities and constraints for the present politics of China. The case of Taiwan is also included as a comparison. 
 
 American Politics
  
  This class introduces students to the basic concepts and theories relating to the study of political institutions, processes, behaviour, and policy in the United States. In the first half of the class we examine ‘American exceptionalism,’ and its political culture. In the second we examine the institutions of the US political system, covering such topics as the constitution, federalism and the branches of the central government. 
  We'll also discuss: 
   
   the US party system 
   political participation and mobilisation 
   individual voting behaviour 
   public opinion 
   nominations and elections 
   media 
   interest groups 
   the question of where power lies 
   
  The class will conclude with a survey of public policy in the United States, in several dimensions. 
 
 Scottish Politics 
  
  The class seeks to provide a comprehensive overview of Scottish politics contextualising it within UK, European and world politics, historical inheritance and contemporary Scottish society. It'll examine the practice of Scotland’s governing institutions, the changing nature of democracy in Scotland, the impact of devolution on policy and broader governance as well as Scotland’s constitutional status. 
 
 Local Politics
  
  This class looks at the issue of who holds power in local politics in the UK as well as examining changing managerial and democratic practice. It asks some fundamental questions about local politics, such as: 
   
   how is local democracy justified? 
   who holds power? 
   what is the basis of that power? 
   what is the role of citizens in localities today? 
   what is the role of local governing institutions? 
   how are local public services delivered 
   how is policy made and delivered? 
   
 
 War, Terrorism & Conflict
  
  This course looks at the multi-faceted and ever-changing nature of war, conflict and terrorism, in the context of the end of the Cold War and the September 11 terrorist attacks. It addresses debates within the sub-discipline of Strategic Studies (i.e. the study of the use of force) and International Relations more broadly, relevant to the causes of war, the conditions of peace and strategies for dealing with terrorism and conflict. 
 
 Parliamentary Studies
  
  This class is co-taught with staff from the UK Parliament and the Scottish Parliament. It also involves deliberative sessions with parliamentarians. 
 
 Contemporary British Governance
  
  The class focuses on how Britain is governed, focusing particularly on how its main institutions and processes – with their own influences, conflict and dynamics – have risen to the multiple challenges of the modern world, ranging from demands for sub-national autonomy in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, to the opportunities and constraints afforded by Britain’s membership of the European Union. 
  
 Journalism & Creative Writing 
 Journalism 3
  
  We examine the techniques and art of feature writing. This means building upon key aspects of the news writing class in year 2. It also means exploring why features are important in tabloid, broadsheet and digital forms: 
   
   identifying what elements make a good feature article 
   how features are constructed 
   what major skills are needed to write a good feature piece 
   
  The art of feature writing has been impacted by the use of digital technology, from Tweeting to major long-form article sites. We’ll look in the lectures and, particularly in the workshop activities, at how digital technology has shaped everything including how we actually use that technology to research and source stories. 
  The history of feature writing in magazine, newspaper and various online forms will be studied. The class will build towards showing the links that exist between shorter feature pieces (profiles, columns etc) and longer magazine articles. 
  By the end of the class, you'll understand: 
   
   the links that exist between news writing and feature writing 
   how to tell a story within a feature article 
   how to gather research with an eye to characterisation and narrative 
   how to structure articles 
   how to use creative fictional techniques without losing sight of strict journalistic best practice techniques 
   The class should also be able to spot what can take a long feature article into other mediums like full-length books and multi-media projects on other digital platforms.  
   
 
 Creative Writing 3
  
  Covering the technique and craft of dramatic writing, this class looks at writing for screen and for radio, and examines how these skills can be used in fiction. We discuss a range of sources including screenplays by Harold Pinter, as well as radio plays. 
  Starting with the scene, the weekly workshops allow you to work on structure, plot, characterisation, dialogue and non-linear structure, which you will use as the basis for assessed pieces, which can be either screen or radio plays, or fiction.   
 
 Journalism & Creative Writing 3
  
  The first half of this class focuses on research informed creative non-fiction pieces including the profile, the travel piece, the obituary and the hybrid narrative. Set texts and films include work by Joan Didion, David Foster Wallace and Susan Orleans and examines how these writers have used narrative to capture real life, people and events. 
  In semester 2 the focus switches to journalism. 
  You'll attend a series of lectures and workshops which focus on the connection between using ‘real-life’ gathered raw material for journalism-based and /or fictional projects. We'll explore the complex links between non-fiction and fiction, including: 
   
   How can you use fictional techniques in non-fiction projects? 
   How far can you stretch the ‘rules’ of journalism? 
   What strategies must you employ when gathering material for a non-fiction project which ensures most impact for the readers? 
   How can these projects be exploited to fullest effect without losing inherent integrity and worth? 
   
  You'll learn through case-studies how the authors have used real-life as a source for their work, whether it is long-form journalism, documentaries, reportage photography, or journalism-based Hollywood movies. 
  The class reading list includes: 
   
   novels 
   adventure narratives 
   travelogues 
   novelists using non-fiction forms for social justice ends 
   novelists using journalistic research-gathering means to add realism and a factual-edge to their fictional-work 
   
 
 Year 4 
 Politics 
 Theories & Practices of Regulation & Governance
  
  The aim of this class is to introduce students to the concepts, theories, institutions and processes of regulatory governance. The transnational and international dimension of regulatory governance is also taken into account. 
 
 Governance & Development
  
  This class aims to investigate the political determinants of peace and prosperity, conflict and poverty. It also deals with the recent literature on conflict, inequality, and globalisation. A special emphasis will be placed on providing an understanding of the contemporary challenges facing developing countries. 
 
 Political Parties
  
  This class adopts a comparative approach to the study of political parties and party systems, focusing on Europe and the United States. We discuss the main functions and organisational and ideological characteristics of the different types of parties found in these regions, and the way in which parties adapt to social change. 
  We look at the relationship between parties and voters from the alternative theoretical perspectives of class voting, partisan identification and rational choice. We also examine party systems and party government. 
 
 Comparative Politics
  
  The class focuses on how we do comparative politics (methodology). We'll consider the comparative method, and how the scientific method can be applied to the study of politics. We consider the problem of only having a relatively small number of cases to compare, and how we select these, as well as the difference between case-study driven, small-n and large-n studies. We also consider the use of ideal types – the importance of finding a language to compare very complex systems. 
 
 Green Politics
  
  This class is divided into four main blocks: 
   
   green political theory 
   environmental attitudes & behaviour 
   environmental movements 
   green parties 
   
 
 Political Behaviour
  
  The focus of this class is the individual voter. Individual characteristics, such as education, socio-economic status, political attitudes and values, or involvement in social and political networks are looked at. However, contextual factors, such as the institutional framework, can also play a role for a wide range of political actions. 
 
 Feminism & Politics
  
  This class provides a critical introduction to feminism and its implications for politics. Over the last few decades, feminists have systematically challenged the long-standing view that politics is gender-neutral by uncovering masculinist bias and drawing attention to the neglected experiences, values and arguments of women. 
  Feminists have also reconstructed key political concepts and practices and expanded the range of issues and ideas understood to be political. 
 
 International Relations Theory in a Global Age
  
  This class explores debates about key concepts in International Relations theory, in the context of what is widely seen as a new era in the analysis and practice of global politics. The class investigates the 'cutting-edge' of IR theory and makes connections with social and political thought more generally. 
 
 International Security: Concepts & Issues
  
  Students are introduced to the literature and research agendas related to security and conflict studies. Specifically, the course will explore various aspects of civil war, terrorism, international conflict, armed transfers and refugee security. 
 
 Analysing Religion & Politics
  
  The impact of faith upon politics is evident in many ways, including: 
   
   the 1979 revolution in Iran 
   conflicts in Afghanistan and the Middle East 
   the Catholic Church's contribution to democratisation efforts in Latin America and Eastern Europe 
   the role of religious actors in current debates on Islam in the EU 
   
  The class introduces students to the systematic study of these phenomena based on a quantitative methods perspective. Qualitative approaches are also considered. As part of the class assessment, students will conduct an empirical case study. 
  
 Journalism & Creative Writing
 These are Honours classes currently offered. Not all of these classes will necessarily run every year and you should check with Course Support which are available for study. 
 Dissertation Journalism
  
  The dissertation is 6000-8000 words long and provides an opportunity to undertake a short research project on an approved topic of your choice. You'll be allocated an individual supervisor who'll guide your research and read drafts of your dissertation. 
  Please consult the dissertation handbook on MyPlace for further information on the English, Journalism and Creative Writing dissertation options and requirements for entry to these classes. 
  The ‘special project’ journalism dissertation should consist of 6000 words of journalism and 2000 words of critical analysis/reflection. 
 
 Dissertation in Creative Writing
  
  The dissertation is 6000 words long and provides an opportunity to undertake a short research project on an approved topic of your choice. You'll be allocated an individual supervisor who'll guide your research and read drafts of your dissertation. 
  Please consult the dissertation handbook on MyPlace for further information on the English, Journalism and Creative Writing dissertation options and requirements for entry to these classes. 
  The Creative Writing dissertation has two components: 
   
   creative work of up to 6,000 words 
   a 2,000 word critical reflection 
   
 
 Journalism Portfolio
  
  This class is driven by the realities of journalism in Scotland, the UK and wider world, in the 21st century. 
  The media landscape is changing fast and this class aims to study, impart and practice skills, theories and approaches which will assist us in understanding journalism and becoming better journalists. Technology and journalism have gone hand in hand since the days of paper and pencil. 
  This class identifies and utilises the latest developments in our digital toolbox which include: 
   
   online databases 
   online sources 
   discussion boards 
   social networking sites 
   blogs 
   You'll study how best to use them in producing excellent journalism. Technology can help journalists create great journalism – but it should never overwhelm, control or unduly influence the story. It's only useful if it helps us be produce powerful and compelling work. So, we'll learn how to use classic newsgathering techniques (e.g. face-to-face interviewing) alongside exciting new approaches.
   
  Much superb journalism still exists in print of course. But increasingly, stories are also being published on a multi-platform basis allowing us to see, hear and read additional material which adds depth and width to the stories themselves. 
 
 Creative Writing Portfolio 
  
  You'll develop your knowledge and understanding of advanced skills necessary to the creation of fiction and poetry. These will be developed via critical and analytical reflection on aspects of enjoyable published work by leading writers in these fields. 
  You'll undertake a series of writing tasks on a weekly basis designed to foster your ability to manipulate narrative and poetic structures and an understanding of the importance of editing and redrafting your work. You'll also develop a knowledge of some of the major thematic and formal issues present in current British and American fiction and poetry. 
  The course will be taught through a mixture of workshop, guided reading and practical tasks and is taught by published creative writers. 
 
 Media & Literary Publics
  
  This class looks at the development and significance of the various formations of media and literary publics. 
  We'll examine the cultivation of the literary public in the 17th century, alongside the development of particular literary forms, and will look at the development of political forms of public and its literary expression.   The class will look at literary production as a vital component in the shaping of the social environment and relations. 
  We'll also examine the extent to which an understanding of public allows us to critically evaluate such issues as cultural distinction, the marketing and branding of literary and media production, and the expansion of political and literary engagement. 
  Finally, the class will look at the manner in which alternative ideas of media public have been used to create innovative and radical types of media and literary production and consumption. 
 
 New Narratives
  
  The class will mainly focus on your own creative output be that fiction, creative non-fiction or poetry. 
  It will also look at what is possible using traditional and digital media and encourage you to disseminate their work in a number of ways. This could be creating audio recordings or digital 'trailers' of their work to be accessed through a podcast or on a dedicated Youtube channel. Technology used will all be readily accessible on a smartphone or a computer, such as Paper Camera, Hipstamatic, Voice Recorder, imovie, and social media sites such as Twitter and Facebook. 
  The class will also look at traditional literary magazines, online literary magazines and the emergence of magazines that use new technology such as Electric Literature. Culminating in a public reading, the emphasis will be on how to move beyond the university workshop and engage with the rapidly evolving publishing landscape. 
 
 The Journalism of War
  
  This class will examine the reporting which has emanated from major conflicts over the last century. 
  The starting point will be dispatches from the First World War. The class will end with recent reporting from Iraq and Afghanistan. The journalistic output will be in the form of published press reports, novels, travelogues, radio scripts, television broadcasts and online coverage. 
  The class will focus on the techniques used by the authors: 
   
   historical constraints 
   identify common threads through output through the decades 
   assessing the changing mission of reporters 
   evaluating the technological impact of the broadcast and recent digital eras 
   the various focus chosen by journalists in the last century – moving from the ‘general’ reporting to the ‘personal story’ 
   
  The style of output will be scrutinised, along with the changing needs of the audiences. The theoretical backdrop will focus on: 
   
   the shifting demand for conflict reporting as democratic societies developed in the last century 
   the changing nature of the backgrounds of the journalists themselves 
   the widening access to new technology 
   the move towards increasing risk in reporting from conflict zones globally 
   
 
 Ethical Issues in Journalism
  
  In reporting the news today journalists face an increasingly diverse range of ethical dilemmas. This can have a significant impact on the manner in which they report the news. 
  Ethical issues do not only occur in traditional, mainstream reporting. New challenges are being thrown up by the use of the internet as a newsgathering tool, a publishing forum and as a means of interacting with the audience. 
  This class examines ethical issues relating to truth and trust, taste and offence, privacy and intrusion and respecting people. It considers the procedures that journalists use to solve ethical dilemmas and systems that are used to curb media excesses, both in traditional media forms and online. 
  
 