Course content 
 Phase 1 
 Level 8 
 Contemporary Childhood: a Sociological Exploration
 
   This module aims to develop students' awareness and understanding of contemporary childhood and to evaluate the contribution of parents, carers, families, communities and services to children's childhoods. It will provide a sociological exploration of childhood in Scotland today from an ecological perspective. 
 
 Academic Literacy, Communication & Professional Values
  
  The transition to degree level study can present many challenges in studying independently and communicating effectively. In a context of increasing integration of care and education services, and play work provision, workers are coming into contact with a wider range of professionals. Appropriate communication is extremely important in these situations. 
  This module seeks to enhance students' range of oral, written and electronic communication skills in a range of contexts and situations. This is so they can take full advantage of the learning opportunities on the course and become more effective communicators. 
 
 A Child's World: Experiences in Learning Environments
  
  This module will develop an awareness of how children experience learning environments. The central idea running throughout the module is an exploration of the ecological environment from the perspective of the child. It focuses on children's agency in contributing to their experiences by considering the ways that children can interact with resources and space while using their own creativity to develop playful learning experiences. 
 
 Phase 2 
 Level 8 
 Playful Pedagogies: Children as Thinkers
  
  This module will investigate the significance of play to children's thinking and to the development of positive learning dispositions for children of all ages. The ways in which pedagogical practices shape the play experiences of children in a variety of settings will be explored. The influence of culture on play repertoires will be considered, including play experiences in families and communities. 
 
 Emotional & Social Development: Foundations for Learning & Health
  
  This module will introduce emotional and social development in children, examining contemporary theory and research in psychology, biology, and neuroscience. 
  It will present a coherent account of the developing society and affective mind of young persons as the foundations for conceptual and cognitive developments made in learned participation with attuned and caring others. 
 
 Children's Emotional & Social Development: Foundations for Learning & Health
  
  This module will introduce observation of children in the workplace setting with particular focus on their emotional and social development. This will give the practical aspect for learning and understanding the emotional, social, and cognitive development of young children, as well as one's practical work with the children and their families and communities. 
  Contemporary theory and research in psychology, biology, and neuroscience presented in the companion module, "Children's Emotional and Social Development: Foundations for learning and health", will be reflected on with in-depth observations carried out in the workplace and discussed in small group sessions in tutorials. 
 
 Phase 3 
 Level 9  
 Children's Rights & Working in Multi-Professional Teams
  
  Students will explore the issues and difficulties of multi&shy; professional working practices with reference to contemporary research. 
  Students will also explore the background, underpinning principles and content of the UNCRC. They'll have opportunities to consider a number of issues raised by both the requirements of the UNCRC and of subsequent policy and legislation in order to develop an informed and reflective approach to complex situations and ethical dilemmas, and to critically evaluate their own practice. 
 
 Managing & Supporting Children as Active Learners
  
  This module aims to develop student's knowledge, understanding and key management skills of the adult's role in promoting and extending children's learning through active participation and responsive planning. 
  It will provide a professional, theoretical context in which to formalise and extend existing good practice as well as to develop new innovative practice in supporting children's active learning. 
 
 Leadership & Management Including Issues of Quality
  
  This module will explore the relationship between leadership, management and quality. It will encourage students to assess their own knowledge skills and abilities and to look at the ways in which they can support and foster the development of leadership in others within their establishment teams. 
 
 Phase 4  
 Level 9 
 Leading Innovation & Change
  
  This module is designed to enable childcare practitioners to meet the Childhood Practice Standard. The Standard covers the professional actions which lead practitioners are expected to undertake and underpinning three essential elements: 
   
   professional values & personal commitment 
   professional knowledge and understanding 
   professional skills and abilities 
   
 
 Leading People: Managing the Professional Self & Others
  
  The SSSC framework outlines the requirement for lead practitioners to undertake degree level education. A leader should show capability across all areas of management, including, policy, pedagogy, resources, people and self-management. 
  In Year 3 the BACP will have explored the management and leadership of quality and pedagogy. Year 4 will extend this to examine effective leadership by practitioners at all levels of working teams. 
 
 Exploring Research Methods in Childhood Practice
  
  Enquiry led and evidence based approaches to professional development and practice are essential in creating a skilled early years workforce that requires professionals to develop the capacity and infrastructure to provide the highest quality care for our young children. Fundamental research skills and knowledge underpin this process. 
  Planning an effective workplace development requires consideration of key purposes, desired outcomes, key processes and an effective action plan. 
  This module will provide a structured approach to evaluating and comparing methods to practitioner research. Ultimately, through developing these skills, the students will enhance their professionalism while working in multidisciplinary teams. The students will deal with ethical considerations and issues in accordance with professional ethical codes (national, local and university). 
  
 Learning & teaching
 The degree is a part-time programme. There are two ways to study for each module: 
  
  traditional sessions with tutors one evening per week from 6-9pm and occasional Saturdays 
  a blend of e-learning, using a virtual learning environment and group instruction (hons year) 
  
 A multidisciplinary lecturing team provides expertise in the design and delivery of the course, ensuring specialist teaching in each module. Individual student support is also available from named members of the team.