Course content 
 Year 1 
 Compulsory classes 
 Engineering Industry & Profession 
  
  To provide an overview of industry and give you some understanding of the industry environment that you would enter as well as the types of roles you would/could undertake. To explain role and responsibility of the engineering profession and individual engineer. 
  The class is delivered to first-year undergraduate students in the specific context of electronic and electrical engineering together with relationship to mechanical engineering and computer systems. 
 
 Electronic & Electrical Techniques & Design 1 
 
   1. To introduce you to the practical and professional skills required of an engineer
  2. To underpin theoretical concepts introduced elsewhere in Year 1 modules
  3. To introduce you to individual and group project work
  4. To expose you to problems requiring system integration and design
  5. To encourage innovation in the context of project work 
  6. To facilitate the development of a range of transferable skills 
 
 Engineering Design For Software Development 1 
  
  This class will teach elementary computer programming for the absolute beginner. We begin with an introduction of how a computer process instructions then move on to the basic of programming. 
  Foundation level programming constructs are addressed early in the class and include decision making (conditional flow control) and iteration (loops). The class focuses largely on procedural programming in the first semester and leaves details of functionalisation and object-oriented programming to the second semester. 
  Throughout the class, the emphasis is strongly on problem solving such that the skills developed can be cross transferred to other languages. 
  The teaching language used will be Python - a language that permits the programmer to concentrate on the problem solving aspects of programming rather than being distracted by the syntax of the language. 
 
 Electronic & Electrical Principles 1 
 
   To provide you with a foundational understanding of the analysis and design of both analogue and digital electronic circuits. 
 
 Engineering Mathematics 1E
 
   To give a basic understanding of the concepts and applications of mathematical functions, differentiation, integration and complex numbers.   The class also provides an introductory experience of using mathematical tools to apply these concepts to practical engineering examples. 
 
 Engineering Mathematics 2E
 
   To give a basic understanding of the concepts and applications of calculus, geometry, vectors, matrices and numerical methods. 
 
 Physical Sciences
  
  By the end of the class you'll be able to: 
   
   calculate the linear or rotational motion of objects under simple forces or torques 
   be able to apply a basic understanding of atomic and solid state physics to explain conduction in semiconductors and semiconductor devices 
   to be able to calculate the motion of charges in simple electric and magnetic fields 
   to be able to calculate the electric and magnetic fields around static charge or current configurations using the laws of Coulomb, Gauss and Ampere 
   to be able to calculate properties of electromagnetic devices such as motors and dynamos 
   
 
 Year 2 
 Compulsory classes 
 Engineering Design & Manufacture 
 
   This class aims to introduce you to concepts and methodology required to undertake effective design and development of engineering systems. The product development process will be introduced and through practice, a working knowledge of appropriate engineering design processes, tools and techniques will be gained.
  
  An overview of manufacturing and the manufacturing industry will provide a general appreciation of the range of processes employed in manufacturing together with an understanding of how components can be manufactured economically and reliably. 
 
 Physical Electronics 
 
   Following completion of this class you'll be able to demonstrate knowledge of following topics: 
  
   Basic Quantum Theory
   Early experiments – e/m, photo-electric effect 
   Structure of the atom
   Wave-particle duality
   Schrodinger equation and application in simple systems
   Basic Semiconductor Physics
   Crystal structure Electron mobility Band theory
   Doping of semiconductors
   Physics of p-n junctions
   Basic Device Physics
   Diode operation
   LED and laser diodes
   .
   
 
 Electromagnetism 
 
   You'll gain an understanding of the application of electromagnetic effects in practical devices and develop the mathematical skills necessary to analyse these effects in simple geometries. 
 
 Electronic & Electrical Principles 2 
 
   To introduce you to the analysis and design of analogue circuits and systems as used in electronics, energy & power systems, communications, control and analogue signal processing applications. 
 
 Digital Electronic Systems 
 
   To introduce you to the use of digital electronics and the rudiments of digital signal processing systems. 
 
 Electronic & Electrical Techniques & Design 2
 
   To develop a broad understanding of many aspects of engineering (general electrical and electronic, power engineering, mechanical engineering, computing and software) and to enhance generic skills required of a professional engineer (research, practical, teamworking, communications, reporting writing, oral presentation).   
  
   You'll also benefit from two laboratory-based projects, which will enhance your understanding of important electrical and engineering principles that underpin many other classes within the degree programme
   
 
 Engineering Design For Software Development 2 
  
  To give: 
   
   an understanding of programming concepts and object orientation 
   familiarity with the syntax and facilities available in C++ 
   an ability to write working programs for use in engineering applications 
   
 
 Engineering Mathematics 3E
  
  
   The aims of this class are:
   
   
   to develop the means of solving certain differential equations 
   to consider applications of Taylor and Maclaurin series 
   to generalise earlier ideas in calculus to deal with functions of several variables 
   to discuss in more detail matrices, determinants and functions of a complex variable 
   to introduce vector calculus and eigenvalues/eigenvectors 
   
 
 Year 3 
 Study Abroad
 
   You'll study an approved curriculum at the overseas academic partner that is equivalent to that which would have been studied if you had remained at Strathclyde. 
 
 Year 4 
 Compulsory classes 
 Individual Project
 
   You undertake an individual research project.   This will help you gain valuable technical and project management skills. 
  
 Elective classes
 Choose at least 4 from this list 
 Communications Networks 
 
   To provide an understanding of the principles and key transport technologies which underpin high-speed heterogeneous broadband communications networks and architectures while giving an insight to the technical and strategic challenges associated with the provision of a Quality of Service (QoS)-based integrated future-network platform. 
 
 Control Principles 
  
  
   This class aims:
   
   
   to introduce you to the basic concepts, mathematical tools and design methods of classical control theory 
   to enable you to use analysis and design tools used in control engineering and appreciate the industrial applications of control systems 
   to enable you to analyse and design closed loop control system specifically using industrial three-term (PID) controllers 
   to introduce you to advanced control methods and to provide a basic understanding of a time-domain approach to control analysis and design of industrial processes 
   to appreciate the application of control theory in industrial applications 
   
 
 Photonic Systems 
 
   The primary aim of this class is to enable you to develop a basic conceptual understanding and working knowledge of fibre optic communications systems and their component parts addressing basic principles, engineering, design and performance limits. All of the fundamental principles of light, optics and photonic components necessary to achieve this are dealt with, giving a broad appreciation of photonics in general. 
 
 Power Electronics, Machines & Applications 
  
   
   Understand the principles of common power electronic systems 
   Gain familiarity with the techniques required to analyse common power electronic circuits 
   Understand the basic principles behind the design of rotating electrical machines 
   Gain familiarity with the techniques required to analyse basic DC and AC machines 
   Recognise that disturbances exist within a power system substation and appreciate that these disturbances may affect electromagnetic compatibility 
   Be competent in dealing with the implications of those disturbances; in particular the effects of system switching 
   Understand the use of power electronic devices, drives and machines for given applications, specifically for Electric Vehicles i.e. cars and trains 
   Understand the range of energy sources capable of powering `independent? (as opposed to catenary supplied) EVs (e.g. batteries and fuel cells), understand how these energy sources work, their performance and degradation issues, and how to charge/fuel them. 
   
 
 Power System Design, Operation & Protection 
  
  
   To enable you to appreciate the principles of analysis, design and protection of electrical power systems including:
   
  
   1. design and operational approaches in power systems including electricity generation, transmission and distribution
   
  
   2. analysis and design of transmission and distribution networks
   
  
   3. power flow, fault and stability calculations
   
  
   4. power system control including load frequency control and economic dispatch
   
  
   5. generation technology implications on power system design and operation
   
  
   6. the main concepts related to the requirements, functions, design and operation of protection schemes for power system transmission and distribution systems
   
  
   7. detailed understanding of selected protection schemes used in transmission and distribution networks
   
 
 Analogue Systems 
 
   This class will provide you with an appreciation and understanding of analogue electronic circuit design, relating to high frequency amplifiers and low noise design of electronic systems. 
 
 Digital Signal Processing Principles 
 
   Develop necessary tools that will allow you to design, analyse and simulate (Matlab/Simulink) DSP systems by introducing core mathematical concepts, algorithms and fundamental properties of discrete signal and systems with applications 
 
 Information Transmission & Security 
 
   Impart an understanding of the principles by which information can transmitted with varying levels of security and the techniques by which communication systems can be analysed and designed. 
 
 Year 5 
 Compulsory classes 
 Group Project 
  
  This project will have a strong industrial influence and provide you with an opportunity to utilise both your hardware and software skills by developing a functioning system.   You are required to demonstrate at an internal business tradeshow/exhibition at the end of the year. 
  
 Elective classes
 Choose at least 4 from this list 
 Advanced Power System Analysis & Protection 
 
   Allow you to understand, critically analyse and assess technical requirements for power system operation, management and planning. 
  To enable you to carry out advanced types of power system analysis as well as understand and use results from these analyses in power system operation and planning.
  To enable you to have a detailed understanding of the main concepts related to the function, design and operation of protection schemes for distribution, transmission and generation applications.
  To enable you to understand the implementation and other associated issues relating to protection of power systems. 
 
 High Voltage Technology & Electromagnetic Compatibility 
  
  The aim is: 
   
   to introduce the fundamentals of high voltage electrical insulating systems 
   to provide a basic understanding of principles, mechanisms and characteristics of high voltage discharges in vacuum and condensed media 
   to provide a basic understanding of the behaviour of dielectric materials stressed with electric fields and their use in high voltage systems 
   to understand the principles of high voltage generation and impulse testing of the high voltage systems 
   recognise that disturbances exist within a power system substation and appreciate that these disturbances may affect electromagnetic compatibility 
   be competent in dealing with the implications of those disturbances; in particular the effects of system switching 
   
 
 Power Electronics For Energy & Drive Control 
 
   Modern energy conversion systems rely on the integration of range of technologies including power electronics, electromechanical actuators and energy storage elements. This class will build knowledge of the building block technologies and show their application to modern energy conversion systems. 
 
 Power System Economics, Market & Asset Management 
 
   Present and give an understanding of the economics, trading and pricing of electricity supply and how it is shaped by technical, commercial and regulatory considerations.
  Give an understanding of power system economics under an environment of multiple suppliers and users.
  Present the challenges, technologies and value of asset management within an electricity supply industry context.
  Give a deep appreciation of factors affecting security of supply and how it might be quantified. 
 
 Wind Energy & Distributed Energy Resources 
 
   To provide an understanding of the principles of wind turbine power generation with attention to the wind resource, rotor aerodynamics, structural design, power conversion and control. It also addresses socio-economic issues and provides an underpinning in distributed energy resources including small scale generation, energy storage and demand management and their integration and management within power networks. 
 
 Advanced Digital Signal Processing 
 
   Develop the necessary skills that will allow you to analyse, design, implement and simulate advanced DSP techniques and algorithms for a variety of communications and general engineering problems. 
 
 Advanced Microcontroller Applications 
 
   Provide advanced competence in the use of industry standard microcontrollers programmed in low and high level languages in real time applications. 
 
 DSP & FPGA-Based Embedded System Design 
 
   Design and implementation of real time embedded systems through familiarisation with Digital Signal Processors (DSPs) and FPGAs via lectures, up-to-date technical discussions and hardware programming. This class provides hands-on experience in translating Digital Signal Processing concepts into real-time embedded systems applications. 
 
 Image & Video Processing 
  
  
   To provide an introduction to the techniques relevant to digital images and video.
   
  
   This includes techniques both to process images and video and also to efficiently compress and communicate them.
   
  
   The class will give you a comprehensive understanding of various image and video processing and coding standards. You'll also study some key applications of these standards.
   
 
 Control Techniques 
  
  This class aims: 
   
   to introduce you to the concepts and tools of modelling, simulation for control of dynamical systems 
   to introduce you to the concepts of computer control engineering and enable you to learn the skills required to understand and analyse digital control systems for real time engineering applications 
   to enable you to appreciate the design of estimation and its use in control design 
   to introduce you to the methods of system parameter identification and its application in control engineering 
   to present you with the concepts of fault monitoring, detection, isolation in dynamical systems 
   to introduce you to the monitoring and evaluation of closed-loop system performance 
   to appreciate the industrial applications of control engineering methods 
   
 
 Mobile & Wireless Networks 
 
   Impart an understanding of how mobile networks work, the requirements and constraints which they contend with, and the operation of common wireless networks, including GSM, UMTS and Wi-Fi. 
  
 