Course content 
 Year 1 
 Integrating Studies 1
 
   This class aims to develop a broad range of knowledge and skill concerned with studentship, professionalism and ICT and a technical working knowledge of product development resources, processes and procedures. 
 
 Introduction to Production Engineering & Management
  
  
   This class is a foundation class that aims to provide you with an overview of industry as well as management theory and practice, emphasising the key role of managers and engineers within organisations. It also aims to provide you with a general appreciation of the types of organisation and range of processes and materials employed in production.
   
 
 Technology Concepts
 
   To introduce you to the language of technology and stimulate awareness of the basic ideas, laws and science which underpins technology. 
 
 Elective classes
  
  You can choose from: 
   
   How Things Work 
   Introduction to French 1A 
   Introduction to Italian 1A 
   Introduction to Spanish 1A 
   Introduction to Business Start-Up   
   Creativity & Opportunity Recognition 
   The Universe & Everything   
   Images 
   Introduction to French 1B 
   Introduction to Italian 1B 
   Introduction to Spanish 1B 
   New Venture Creation 
   Introduction to Forensic Science 
   
 
 Year 2 
 Design 2
 
   The aim of this class is to provide continuation of the first year classes, oncentrating on techniques appropriate to different phases of the design process including user centred research, conceptual, embodiment and detailed design. 
 
 Integrating Studies 2
 
   This class aims to develop the your ability to create appropriate functional prototypes for the purposes of mechanical design and visualisation. To engender an appreciation of different prototyping methods and their application areas. 
 
 Production Techniques 1
 
   This class aims to increase the depth of production technology knowledge gained in the first year Introduction to Production and Engineering Management class. It introduces you to primary processes for metal and polymer production, metal cutting theory, secondary manufacturing processes, engineering metrology, and the manufacture of electronic components and products. 
 
 Sports Engineering
 
   This class aims to enable you to understand both the basic principles of fluid mechanics and materials choice and apply this knowledge to the design and evaluation of the performance of athletes and their equipment 
 
 Year 3 
 Integrating Studies 3
 
   This class aims to develop design and manufacturing project based skills relevant to each of the four undergraduate degree courses, and to provide practice in the application of engineering, manufacture and design principles. 
 
 Product Development
 
   This methods based class aims to develop and enhance your knowledge of the issues, concepts, methodologies and methods involved in product design and development. 
 
 Mechatronics Design & Applications
 
   This class aims to provide you with an understanding of the fundamental concepts and methods of mechatronic system design and applications including those in manufacturing industry. 
 
 Elective classes
  
  You can choose from: 
   
   Production and Operations Management 
   Production Techniques 2 
   Vertically Integrated Project    
   
 
 Year 4 
 Advanced Design Methods
 
   This class builds upon the knowledge of Design Methods acquired in DM306. It'll develop knowledge and understanding of the integration, development and application of design methods.   This is in the areas of design for manufacture and assembly, sustainability, cost and design for Xs at embodiement and detail design level. 
 
 Advanced Product Design & Manufacture
 
   This class aims to introduce design and manufacturing techniques and systems at an advanced level. It enables you to understand the application of advanced product design engineering and manufacturing techniques/systems in product development (in particular in mechatronic systems). This includes developing manufacturing plans for product realisation. It provides opportunities for you to develop technology focused products/systems within the class supervised environment as well as to generate plans for the manufacture of these products/systems for volume production. 
 
 Individual Project 1
 
   This class aims to consolidate and develop experience in undertaking a major individual project and develop a good appreciation of professional practice by utilising design, manufacturing and management knowledge acquired during the course and applying it to real life situations. 
  You'll create a working prototype for a sports product to a detailed level demonstrating knowledge of specific course related expertise. 
 
 Industrial Group Project 1
 
   This class aims to integrate and apply design, manufacturing and management knowledge and skills, acquired in previous years of the course, to an industry based product development project and to develop team project skills. 
 
 Quality Management
 
   This class aims to equip you with a critical understanding of Quality Management and Control principles, concepts, tools and techniques. The class also aims to introduce you to statistically plan, design and execute industrial experiments for process understanding and improvement in both manufacturing and service environments. 
 
 Elective classes
  
  You can choose from: 
   
   Advanced Design Methods 
   Quality Management 
   Industrial Placement 1 
   Industrial Placement 2 
   Vertically Integrated Project 
   
 
 Year 5  
 UG Individual Project 2
 
   This class aims to consolidate and develop experience in undertaking a major individual project and develop a good appreciation of professional practice by utilising design, manufacturing and management knowledge acquired during the course and applying it to real life situations. 
  
  You'll demonstrate knowledge of specific course related expertise.   You'll create and evaluate a working prototype for a sports related project, understanding the dynamics for specific sports, biomechanics, etc. 
 
 Industrial Group Project 2
 
   This class aims to integrate and apply design, manufacturing and management knowledge and skills, acquired in previous years of the course, to an industry based product development project and to develop team project skills. 
 
 Research Studies
 
   This class will develop research skills and acquire an in depth knowledge of a relevant research field. 
 
 Industrial Placement 4
  
  This class aims for you to gain experience at undertaking a project within industry and demonstrate an ability to relate theory to practice and vice versa. 
 
 Elective classes 
  
  
   You can choose from:
   
   
   Global Design 
   People, Organisation and Technology 
   Strategic technology Management 
   Product Modelling and Visualisation 
   Systems Integration 
   Supply Chain Operations 
   CAED Systems 
   Management of Total Quality and Continuous Improvement 
   Design Management 
   Information Management 
   Vertically Integrated Project 
   Prosthetics and Orthotics 
   Cardiovascular Devices 
   Clinical and Sports Biomechanics 
   Biomedical Instrumentation 
   Biomedical Electronics 
   
     
  
 