Modules  
  The MA Education has two core modules - Practice-Based Inquiry (30 credits) and the dissertation (60 credits). The remainder of the 90 credits come from elective modules grouped in subject areas.  
  
  
    MA Education module information 
   
   
    
     Subject Area  
     Core Modules   
     Mode of Teaching  
     Experience Required   
    
    
        
      Practice-Based Inquiry   (Also available within Educational Leadership and Management)   
     Evening/daytime sessions in the Autumn and Spring semesters.  Also block study in Summer School.   
     We would normally expect you to have one year's relevant experience but this could include your PGCE year(teaching practice).  
    
    
        
     Dissertation  (60 credits)  
     Self-directed study.   
        
    
    
        
     Elective Modules  
        
        
    
    
     Education    
     Changing Classrooms: policy, research and practice   
     Evening sessions in the Autumn semester or in Summer School on an annual rotating basis.  
      You would normally be an education practitioner or have access to a classroom setting but this could include your PGCE year (teaching practice).    
    
    
     Schools, Society and Mental Well Being  
     Evening sessions in the Autumn semester  
      We would normally expect you to have two years' relevant experience       
    
    
      Developmentally Appropriate Practice in Early Years       
     Summer School only  
       You would normally be an education practitioner or have access to a classroom setting but this could include your PGCE year (teaching practice).   
    
    
     Mentoring Beginning Teachers  
     Evening sessions in the Autumn and Spring semesters  
     You must be working as a mentor to beginning teachers or have negotiated agreed access to a mentor/mentee arrangement in a school or college  
    
    
     Educational Leadership and Management      
     Leading Learning   
     Morning and afternoon sessions in the Autumn semester.  Also block study in Summer School.      
     We would normally expect you to have two years' relevant experience.      
    
    
     Issues in Educational Leadership   
    
    
     Effective Leadership and Change in Education  
    
    
     Learning, Technology and Education    
     Introduction to the Learning Sciences   
     Evening sessions in the Autumn and Spring semesters.    
     You would normally be an education practitioner and have two years' relevant experience.    
    
    
     The Social Contexts of Educational Technology   
    
    
     Special Needs         
     Relationships and Behaviour   
        In each semester you can take one module if studying part-time and two if studying full-time. Evening sessions and also block study in Summer School.   The modules are supplemented by an induction day and a study weekend in January each year.            
              We would normally expect you to have two years' relevant experience.    
    
    
     Communication and Literacy   
    
    
     Researching Special and Inclusive Education  
    
    
     Debating Special and Inclusive Education   
    
   
  
      
  
  Assessment 
  
 
     
  
 
   Each 30-credit module is assessed by a written assignment of 6,000 words (or equivalent). To complete the Masters programme successfully, a pass of 50 must be achieved on each assignment. 
  
  
    
  
 
   The dissertation is an original piece of work and should be of 12,000-15,000 words (or their equivalent) related to one of the selected modules on an approved topic.