Modules  
  Core modules  
  All students take the following core modules:  
  
   Power Generation and Carbon Capture  
   Innovation and Technology Transfer  
   Communication & Public Engagement Skills  
   Energy Systems and Policy  
   Research Project  
   Industrial Case Studies (Loughborough University)  
  
  Optional modules  
  Students then choose from these optional modules, which are delivered at the lead university or may be available via video-conference lecture.  
  Optional modules led by the University of Nottingham  
  
   Combined Heat and Power  
   Advanced Thermal Power Systems  
   Petroleum Production Engineering  
   Energy Storage  
  
  Optional modules led by the University of Birmingham  
  
   Advanced Reaction Systems  
   Systems Modelling  
   Conventional Energy Technology  
   Measurement Techniques  
   Process Engineering Fundamentals  
   Project Management  
  
  Optional Modules available at Loughborough University  
  
   Surface Engineering  
   Ceramics: Properties and Processes  
   Metals: Properties and Processes  
   Materials Modelling  
   Sustainable Use of Materials  
   Teamwork and Leadership  
  
  Further options from across the Midlands Energy Graduate School (MEGS) may be chosen, subject to timetabling and delivery methods.  
  Research Project Topics  
  Each collaborating university offers expertise in particular topics. Please bear these specialisms in mind when choosing at which of the three participating universities you wish to register.  
  Research project topics led by The University of Nottingham  
  
   Carbon capture and storage  
   Advanced gas clean-up technologies for cleaner energy and power generation  
   Gasification technologies (syngas production)  
   Fossil fuel processing (oil, gas, coal and biomass)  
  
  Research project topics led by the University of Birmingham  
  
   Modelling systems  
    Plant design  
    Supercritical reactions  
    Catalysts  
    Carbon capture technologies  
  
  Research project topics led by Loughborough University  
  
   Materials for conventional power generation  
   Steels for ultra-supercritical steam powerplant applications  
   Coatings for superalloys for high temperature service  
   Degradation of materials at high temperatures  
  
  The taught element takes place between September and May and consists of lectures, seminars, tutorials and workshops. The individual project takes place between May and August, based on one of the themes outlined above.  
  Taken over the summer term, based either at the University or in industry, the project brings together many of the core taught elements of the course, allowing students to explore current technologies and systems, plan and manage the project, work in a laboratory or industrial process environment, and evaluate the benefits and impact of their development. The project provides the advanced training necessary for students to be eligible for PhD study, and the advanced skills for process development roles in industry. All projects are supervised by an academic member of staff. The research project must be taken at the university at which the student is registered.  
  For details on our modules, please see the module catalogue.