Modules  
  A full list of available modules can be found in the Law postgraduate module guide.  
  Qualifying module options  
 
   Advanced Copyright and Design Law 
  
  
   The module will deal with special issues in copyright and international exploitation of copyright works at advanced level.   
   First of all we will look in depth at the basic elements of copyright and we will do so via a case study on sensory copyright (smells and taste). Our attention will then turn to enforcement and injunctions against intermediaries, and also jurisdictions issues and choice of law issues (ubiquitous infringement). On the EU side we will look at exhaustion (digital exhaustion) and competition law.   
   Finally we will look at fair use and the protection of derivative works.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate the understanding and knowledge at an advanced level of the nature and function of specific issues of copyright law, relating to new technologies  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   EU Competition Law 
  
  
  
    The module examines the legal regulation of competition within the single and free market of the EU and serves as an introduction to basic legal and economic principles as well as to detailed study of the rules of Union law which seek to outlaw competitive behaviour. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     provide an advanced level course on the European Union Competition Law  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Governance of the EU 
  
  
   This half option explores the European Union’s constitutional system and governance structures. We will discuss the unique nature of the EU as an integrated multilevel legal order of European nation states in which, in certain areas, powers have been transferred to federal institutions.  
   Theories of federalism, functionalism and institutionalism will be explored and notions of the legal and political accountability of the EU as a “system of governance” are a core feature of the module. The use of law as a mechanism for integration, and the role of the courts in such a process, will be examined.   
   This subject can be studied as a stand alone half option or as a companion to other modules in the LLM in European Law and Public International Law.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    study the governance of the EU at an advanced level  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International and Comparative Copyright Law 
  
  
   The module will deal with the basic principles of copyright law at an advanced level. British copyright law will be studied with reference to the international and European obligations of the United Kingdom in this respect. This covers an introduction to copyright law, subject-matter of protection, authorship, ownership and dealings, economic and moral rights, term of protection, infringement and defences.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate the understanding and knowledge at an advanced level of the nature and function of copyright law  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International and Comparative Patent Law 
  
  
   The module will deal with the basic principles of patent law and it will do so from an international and comparative perspective. Special attention will be paid to European and US patent law before attention will turn to biotechnological inventions and a case study on stem cell patents.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate the understanding and knowledge at an advanced level of nature and function of patent law as well as of specific issues of patent law, in relation to biotechnological inventions  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International and Comparative Trade Mark Law 
  
  
   The module will deal with the basic principles of trade mark law and it will do so from an international and comparative perspective. Special attention will be paid to European and US trade mark law before attention will turn to passing-off and comparative advertising issues.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate the understanding and knowledge at an advanced level of nature and function of trade mark law as well as of specific issues related to trade mark law, such as passing-off and comparative advertising  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Commercial Arbitration 
  
  
   This module offers the fundamentals of international commercial arbitration, the most important dispute resolution mechanism for international business transactions.  
   The module begins with the legal framework of international commercial arbitration. It then deals with jurisdiction of arbitration tribunals and certain procedural issues arising in arbitration practice. The module ends with the setting aside and recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards.   
   The course focuses mainly on English law of arbitration which is put in comparative perspective and compared and contrasted especially with the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a knowledge and understanding of principles and main rules of international commercial arbitration  
    develop the students’ ability to identify and resolve main issues arising in arbitration practice  
    develop an understanding of the place that international commercial arbitration occupies in commercial practice and how it relates to other dispute resolution mechanisms, especially international commercial litigation  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Relations Law of the EU 
  
  
   This module is concerned with the EU's attempts to assert its international identity.  
   Subjects being examined will include:  
   
    the issue of competence and effectiveness of the EU as a global actor  
    the Common Commercial Policy  
    the EU/WTO relationship  
    international development  
    human rights conditions in trade/development agreements  
    common foreign and security policy  
    the EU as a 'regional superpower'  
   
   This module aims to:  
   develop knowledge and understanding of a specialised and constantly evolving area of European Law  
  
 
     
  
 
   Minorities and International Human Rights 
  
  
   The module aims to provide a thorough grounding in the application of international law standards to minorities and indigenous peoples. There is a strong focus on the decisions of international and European courts and international human rights bodies.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide students with a thorough grounding in the application of international human rights law standards to minorities and indigenous peoples  
    develop the students’ analytical skills in relation of the function, scope and operation of the international human rights standards relevant to minorities and its likely future development  
    develop critical interpretations of international and European human rights jurisprudence relating to minorities and indigenous peoples  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Public Procurement in EU and International Trade Law 
  
  
   This module examines the regulation of government procurement at international level for the purpose of opening up government markets to free trade.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide a detailed examination of the system under EU Law, which has provided a model for other international systems  
    provide a detailed examination of government procurement regulation in the WTO  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Religion and International Human Rights 
  
  
   The module aims to provide a thorough grounding in the application of international law standards to religion. There is a strong focus on the decisions of international and European courts and international human rights bodies.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide students with a thorough grounding in the application of international human rights law standards to religions and religious believers  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The European Convention on Human Rights 
  
  
   The module covers articles 2, 3, 5, 6, 8 and 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), together with the procedural provisions of the ECHR.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a critical understanding of the jurisprudence of fundamental rights contained in the European Convention on Human Rights  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.