Modules  
  Modules are subject to change. More details can be found in the University's module catalogue.  
  Compulsory modules  
   • N14C09 Introduction to Managing Operations The core nature of operations management and its importance in promoting efficient and competitive business. Balancing the key variables of demand, resources, capacity, inventory and performance. Relationship between operations, marketing and finance. Strategic and day-to-day issues in operations manufacturing and service businesses. Global trends in operations management and the influence of changing markets and technology developments on operating concepts. Case studies of successful practice.  • D24FP1 Core Competences in Food Production Management  This module ensures that the core knowledge required for this course is available to students with different scientific backgrounds. As such it will consider: • Appropriate use of data and statistics for quality management • Hygiene requirements within food factories • General laboratory skills • Written documentation used in food manufacture • Knowledge and use of appropriate terminology used in the manufacture of foods • An understanding and appropriate use of HACCP• Recognition of the key compounds used in food product. • D24FP2 Food Factory Designs and Operations The influence of hygiene, quality and legislation on the manufacture of food will be addressed in terms of factory scale. Design and layout of factories for low and high risk foods; cleaning practices; legal constraints on food producers with reference to English and EC law. The application of all these principles will be illustrated by factory and other appropriate visits. • D24FP3 Food and Factory Design The theory and practical aspects of new product development will be investigated. • N14C26 Supply Chain Management in Practice The module aims to give an in-depth coverage of Supply Chain management and Logistics in the context of contemporary operations, taking into account the major competitive drivers of efficiency and responsiveness and the solutions enabled by new technologies. The module addresses the scope, impact and importance of SC and Logistics management and the major decisions that need to be made in today's world of global supply and global markets. • D24PQM Preservation and Manufacture of Food  Food manufacture will be covered from raw material quality, through formulation and process engineering and packaging. There will emphasis on chemical and manufacturing processes to ensure foods are safe and shelf stable. Statistical process control and methods to follow and measure quality will be taught. Optimising physical and chemical changes to achieve consistent quality in a food product is facilitated by an understanding of the biochemistry/chemistry of the raw materials, an appreciation of their physical interactions and chemical reactions during processing, and a familiarity with the process conditions (temperature; pH etc.) that can be varied to effect changes. Maximising shelf life through selective use of approved preservatives, packaging, and/or the imposition of parameters in the final product such as low water activity or pH values will also be explore.   
  Restricted modules  
  Students must take 35 credits from this group:  
  MM4WOJ Industrial Ergonomics: Jobs, Culture, Change D24AF1 Q3 Food Flavour D24F01 Fundamentals of Hydrocolloid Technology N14G06 Science, Technology, Arts and Business D24FE1 Food Manufacturing Case Studies (5 credit) D24FE2 Food Manufacturing Case Studies (10 credit) N14C31 Managing Projects D24FE3 Food Topics D24FQ9 Organisational Concepts for Biomaterial Trading N14C14 Management Science for Decision Support    More details can be found in the University's module catalogue.  
  Summer Research Project  
  This module involves the completion of a either laboratory or pilot plant based project, or a survey of a particular aspect of a food production process. Many projects will involve collaboration with the food industry, either within the University or working within a company. They can involve practical work or be survey or literature based.  
  A placement within a company will generally only be sought for students that obtain a mark of at least 55% in semester one. Students are expected to take full responsibility for their project schedule but assistance and advice will be provided by academics within the two Divisions and/or the industrial sponsor.  
  The project will provide an insight into the scientific principles of food production processes or the application of modern management techniques to food manufacture.  
  You will submit your dissertation at the end of the placement period.