Modules  
  
   Research Methodologies for Health Care Communication (30 credits)  
  
 
   This module introduces students to 4 different methodological approaches to analysis that can be used to study interpersonal and written communication in health care: i) Discourse Analysis ii) Critical Discourse Analysis iii) Conversation Analysis iv) Corpus Linguistics. Students will be introduced to the assumptions and techniques of these kinds of analysis and will be familiarised with examples of the methods in action in research on health care. Differences and similarities between the approaches will be highlighted. Issues around choice of method, choice of method to suit the research question, and the application of findings will be explored. Throughout the module students will experience what work using these different analytical approaches might involve and consider the practical and theoretical issues raised by these activities. Students will also be encouraged to develop a critical appreciation of the strengths and weaknesses of each method of analysis and the circumstances in which each is most appropriate 
  
 
     
  
  
   Health Care Narratives (30 credits)  
  
 
   This module is intended to familiarise students with theories and applications of narrative in health care contexts. The module will address the following key areas: i) Narratology: Theories of narrative ii) Personal narratives of illness iii) Professional narratives iv) Organisation and policy narratives v) Narrative as therapeutic intervention The module will provide students with an opportunity to examine what narrative is and how this knowledge can be deployed to help understand a variety of phenomena encountered in health care. The module will equip students with a high level knowledge of narrative theory and how much of what takes place in health care exchanges are governed by the kinds of narratives that are used. Students will also develop and practice skills in identifying and analysing narratives of patients, professionals and policy makers. Students will also understand how knowledge of narratives can be used to enhance therapeutic interventions and practices across a range of health care disciplines. Students will appreciate how health care environments, structures and practices are informed by broader, macro-level organisational and governmental narratives. 
  
 
     
  
  
   Health Care Documentation (30 credits)  
  
 
   This module introduces students to the study of health care documentation. The term documentation will be defined widely so as to include: 
   
    Written and electronic records of client care  
    Case conferences, programme planning and care plans  
    Policy documents at national, local and institutional levels  
    Health promotion and education materials.  
   
   In relation to each of these topics, students will be encouraged to learn about how previous authors have studied these kinds of documentation and critically evaluate the theories and methods employed. Students will, consistent with ethical considerations, be encouraged to collect their own examples for analysis in learning exercises in the module and make use of the materials available in the Nottingham University Health Language Corpus. Learning activities in the module will include a combination of critical analysis of existing research and the students own analysis of health care documentation materials.  
  
 
     
  
  
   The Language of Compliance (30 credits)  
  
  
   This module addresses the issue of compliance in healthcare from a communications perspective. It begins by examining the terminology from a sociological perspective, considering to what extent alternative terms such as adherence and concordance represent a paradigm shift in either policy or practice. The remainder of the module is divided into two sections: macro or structural issues affecting compliance, such as age, gender, cultural background and educational level; and micro level or interactional issues, such as the differences in design and receipt between advice, information or instruction.  
  
 
     
  
     
  Further information about the above modules is available in the Module Catalogue.