Modules  
 
   Please see below for a list of modules that are currently being offered: 
  
 
     
  
  
  
    MA Dissertation in History 
   
   
    The dissertation is an extended piece of research on a research topic within the field of History. All students will have a supervisor appointed during the course of the Research Skills for Historians module and they will be expected to consult the supervisor during and towards the end of the project. All dissertation students will be required to make use of both primary and secondary material and incorporate this into their dissertation.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Methods in History 
   
   
    You will consider the work and influence of eminent historical thinkers, such as Simone de Beauvoir, Michel Foucault, Karl Marx, Thomas Malthus, and Max Weber, alongside various research methods and approaches required in advanced historical research. These will include, among others, biographical searching, locating primary sources, and writing research proposals.  This module consists of a two-hour seminar each week and five 1-hour classes. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Memory and Social Change in Modern Europe and Beyond 
   
   
    This module will aid your understanding of various conceptual approaches to the study of modern history. You will use case studies to chronologically investigate themes such as memory, identity and social change. Through explorations of the ways in which the recent past is memorialised, you will also be introduced to key debates within the literature. For this module, you will have a two-hour seminar each week.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Exploring English Identity 
   
   
    This module examines the ways in which ‘English Identity’ has been constructed in different periods, and how those periods themselves have been used to create an ‘historic’ sense of identity, from the later Middle Ages to the Battle of Britain. Recurring considerations will include race, religion, culture and politics, whilst individual themes will include the distinctions between ‘English’ and ‘British’ and the extent to which constructions of identity have relied upon ideas of inclusion and exclusion. You will have a two-hour seminar each week.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Power and Authority in the Medieval World 
   
   
    You will be introduced to sources for the study of the nature and expression of power and authority in the Middle Ages. Through a range of seminar topics, you will consider conceptual issues alongside their historiography. Some of the topics may include: judicial power in records of north Italian court cases, the ‘Feudal Revolution’ of c.1000, The Pope and the Inquisition, Edward II: royal propaganda vs. royal slander, heresy trial records in 15th and 16th Century England, and William Thorpe’s testimony. You will have a two-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
  
  
    Heresy in the Middle Ages 
   
   
    This module engages students in discussion about the nature of correct and incorrect religious belief in the Middle Ages (c.600-c.1500), and the responses to it by churchmen and secular rulers, through close analysis of original documents from the medieval period. It is convened by the staff of the Medieval Heresy and Dissent Research Network and students will be taught by heresy scholars who are leaders in their field.  
   
  
      
   
  
  
  
    (Mis)perceptions of the Other: from savages and barbarians to the exotic and erotic 
   
   
    This module will investigate the various ways in which western Europeans and Americans have constructed and categorised peoples as the ‘other’ in a wide range of eras and places. This will include some or all of: views on the Jewish and Islamic faiths in the early-medieval period; notions of Russians between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries; constructions of Amerindians and Africans in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries; and views of various societies in the nineteenth and twentieth-century including China and Japan.  
   
  
      
   
  
  
  
    The 1960s in Europe & America: social & cultural change 
   
   
    This module explores the historiography of 1960s social and cultural change with reference to the problems of historical evidence, memory, interpretation, authentication and the political uses of history. The 1960s represent one of the most controversial periods of modern history. Through English-language and some translated sources this module will analyse and reappraise the heavily politicised historiography on the 1960s.  
   
  
      
   
  
  
  
    Foreign Policy and appeasement, 1933-39 
   
   
    This module examines the evolution of British foreign policy from Hitler’s ascendancy to power in Germany in 1933 until the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939.  
   
  
      
   
   
  
  
   
  
    Villains, vice and violence: Crime and punishment in late Imperial Russia 
   
   
    This module explores different aspects of crime, criminality and punishment in late Imperial Russia (1861-1917). This subject allows the investigation of a range of key aspects of late Imperial Russian society.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Aftermath of War: Gender and Post-War Reconstruction after the First and Second World Wars 
   
   
    Focussing mainly on France, Germany and Britain, you will study the social, political and cultural issues that arose in the aftermath of war, with some emphasis on gender relations. These include poverty, population displacement, conflicts over political renewal and justice, and the search for the appropriate commemoration of human loss. You will have a two-hour seminar each week.    
   
  
      
   
  
    Latin and Palaeography 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to two essential requirements for medieval historical research : beginners’ Latin and palaeography. You will systematically work your way through the grammar, syntax and vocabulary of Latin in order to translate basic medieval Latin documents. The palaeography component will introduce you to the various forms of handwriting in medieval manuscripts. You will have two 1-hour seminars each week.