Modules  
  Modules subject to change.  
  Taught modules  
  
   Fundamentals of Biomolecular Science D24BT7 (20 Credits)  
  
  This module covers: Macromolecular size and shape. Basic Physical Biochemistry (1st & 2nd laws of thermodynamics). Water as a solvent: pH, ionic strength. Concentration of solutions of macromolecules and its measurement. Dilute solutions. Solubility: Raoult's & Henry's laws. Colligative properties: Osmotic pressure. Non-ideality of macromolecular solutions. The volume and charge effects of macromolecules. Basic Laboratory Skills, handling experimental data, Error and approximations. Criteria for rejecting data. Indices, logarithms. Statistical funtion keys on calculators. Macromolecular hydration. Heterogeneity of macromolecular solutions - molecular weight averages. Flexibility of linear macromolecules - persistence length and radius of gyration. Absolute and relative methods for determining the molecular weight of macromolecules. Hydrodynamic and imaging techniques. SDS PAGE, Analytical Ultracentrifugation. Basic Colloidal Science, Phase Separation.    
  
   Statistics and Experimental Design for Bioscientists (10 credits)  
  
  This module explains the major principles and techniques of statistical analysis of research data without becoming too involved in the underlying mathematics. Now that computer software is very well established for data analysis, it is more important to understand WHAT a statistical test is doing (and thus whether or not it is appropriate) than to be able to perform the underlying calculations by hand. It is equally important to collect data in an appropriate and planned manner for later analysis. At the end of the course, participants should have an overall grasp of the major analytical techniques available, and how they relate to each other, and have developed abilities in experimental design, data analysis using appropriate software and presentation of results.  
  
   Writing and Reviewing Research Proposals (10 credits)  
  
  This module aims to develop your skills in analysis and writing of research proposals. Specific areas covered include: how to develop a research idea and write a grant application and peer review of research proposals.