Modules  
  A full list of available modules can be found in the Law postgraduate module guide.  
  Qualifying module options  
 
   Advanced Copyright and Design Law 
  
  
   The module will deal with special issues in copyright and international exploitation of copyright works at advanced level.   
   First of all we will look in depth at the basic elements of copyright and we will do so via a case study on sensory copyright (smells and taste). Our attention will then turn to enforcement and injunctions against intermediaries, and also jurisdictions issues and choice of law issues (ubiquitous infringement). On the EU side we will look at exhaustion (digital exhaustion) and competition law.   
   Finally we will look at fair use and the protection of derivative works.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate the understanding and knowledge at an advanced level of the nature and function of specific issues of copyright law, relating to new technologies  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   EU Competition Law 
  
  
  
    The module examines the legal regulation of competition within the single and free market of the EU and serves as an introduction to basic legal and economic principles as well as to detailed study of the rules of Union law which seek to outlaw competitive behaviour. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     provide an advanced level course on the European Union Competition Law  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International and Comparative Copyright Law 
  
  
   The module will deal with the basic principles of copyright law at an advanced level. British copyright law will be studied with reference to the international and European obligations of the United Kingdom in this respect. This covers an introduction to copyright law, subject-matter of protection, authorship, ownership and dealings, economic and moral rights, term of protection, infringement and defences.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate the understanding and knowledge at an advanced level of the nature and function of copyright law  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International and Comparative Patent Law 
  
  
   The module will deal with the basic principles of patent law and it will do so from an international and comparative perspective. Special attention will be paid to European and US patent law before attention will turn to biotechnological inventions and a case study on stem cell patents.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate the understanding and knowledge at an advanced level of nature and function of patent law as well as of specific issues of patent law, in relation to biotechnological inventions  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International and Comparative Trade Mark Law 
  
  
   The module will deal with the basic principles of trade mark law and it will do so from an international and comparative perspective. Special attention will be paid to European and US trade mark law before attention will turn to passing-off and comparative advertising issues.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate the understanding and knowledge at an advanced level of nature and function of trade mark law as well as of specific issues related to trade mark law, such as passing-off and comparative advertising  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Aspects of Corporate Law and Insolvency 
  
  
   The first part of the module focuses on international aspects of company law. Questions examined include:   
   
    whether traditional rules of company law operate properly in the multinational enterprise context  
    whether harmonization of company laws is achievable and whether it is desirable  
   
   The second part focuses on international insolvency, in particular examining global models for cross-border insolvency. Questions examined include:   
   
    where the insolvency proceedings of a multinational enterprise should take place  
    which laws should apply to the global insolvency process?   
    how should the multinational enterprise group in insolvency be dealt with  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide the space to discuss and analyse specific and current issues of company and insolvency law in an international context  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Commercial Arbitration 
  
  
   This module offers the fundamentals of international commercial arbitration, the most important dispute resolution mechanism for international business transactions.  
   The module begins with the legal framework of international commercial arbitration. It then deals with jurisdiction of arbitration tribunals and certain procedural issues arising in arbitration practice. The module ends with the setting aside and recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards.   
   The course focuses mainly on English law of arbitration which is put in comparative perspective and compared and contrasted especially with the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a knowledge and understanding of principles and main rules of international commercial arbitration  
    develop the students’ ability to identify and resolve main issues arising in arbitration practice  
    develop an understanding of the place that international commercial arbitration occupies in commercial practice and how it relates to other dispute resolution mechanisms, especially international commercial litigation  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Consumer Protection 
  
  
   The module examines the role of the law in regulating business and protecting the consumer.   
   It begins by looking at economic and social theories of regulation, identifying what we seek to achieve through regulating, and why regulation is necessary in a competitive market. Next, it examines how we regulate by identifying and critiquing the techniques of regulation. The module then examines how businesses can be held to account through sanctioning, both under the criminal law and in other ways.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    consider the role of law in consumer protection from a global perspective  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Financial and Monetary Law 
  
  
   This module focuses on the public law regulation of international financial and monetary relations, and not on the contractual or transactional aspects of international financial markets.  
   It aims to provide a timely and insightful overview of current regulatory developments in the field of capital and current international transactions as well as financial and monetary stability and supervision.   
   The module also considers the role of major institutions in the regulation of international lending and finance for development.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide an understanding of how the international financial and monetary system is regulated  
    describe the key regulatory techniques used in financial and monetary regulation  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Investment Law 
  
  
   This module deals with key aspects of the international system for the regulation of foreign investment. The module focuses primarily on issues arising from investor-host state relations under Bilateral Investment Treaties or BITs and some other International Investment Agreements or IIAs but also touches upon international investment contracts, where relevant.  
   Special attention will be given to the means of regulating investment using such instruments, including standards of treatment and breaches thereof, the taking of foreign property and the settlement of investment disputes by means of arbitration.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop an understanding of how the international system for the regulation of foreign investment and investment arbitration operates in principle and in practice  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Law of the Sea 
  
  
   The module will consider:  
   
    the history and evolution of the law of the sea   
    baselines, internal waters and the territorial sea   
    straits, archipelagos and the contiguous zone  
    the continental shelf and exclusive economic zone   
    the high seas  
    the international seabed area and ice-covered areas  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide participants with knowledge and understanding of the basic legal framework governing use of the seas  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Relations Law of the EU 
  
  
   This module is concerned with the EU's attempts to assert its international identity.  
   Subjects being examined will include:  
   
    the issue of competence and effectiveness of the EU as a global actor  
    the Common Commercial Policy  
    the EU/WTO relationship  
    international development  
    human rights conditions in trade/development agreements  
    common foreign and security policy  
    the EU as a 'regional superpower'  
   
   This module aims to:  
   develop knowledge and understanding of a specialised and constantly evolving area of European Law  
  
 
     
  
 
   International Sale of Goods 
  
  
   This module deals with international sales of goods, as they are conducted in the international commodity markets according to the rules of English law. It does not cover the United Nations Convention on the International Sale of Goods 1980 and similar instruments.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the international sale of goods in those cases where English law is the applicable law of contract  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Law of International Carriage of Goods by Sea 
  
  
   This module considers the legal regime applicable to the carriage of goods by sea and, in particular, the legal relationship between the shipper (or owner of the goods), the carrier (shipowners) and the recipient (consignee) of the goods shipped.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a knowledge and understanding of the law relating to the international carriage of goods by sea  
    analyse and critically evaluate the most important standard charterparty forms, the bill of lading, and the international conventions affecting sea carriage  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Law of International Trade Finance 
  
  
   The module addresses the private law relating to the financial aspects of international trade, especially payment mechanisms and guarantees.  
   Emphasis is placed upon the rules promulgated by the International Chamber of Commerce.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the private law, both domestic and international, governing financial techniques employed in international trade  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Law of Marine Insurance 
  
  
   This module addresses the law relating to the contractual provision of marine insurance, particularly insurance of hulls and cargo, by the London insurance market. Considerable emphasis is placed upon the contractual clauses promulgated by the International Underwriting Association of London.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge of the law of marine insurance and its contribution to the private law of international trade   
    build an understanding of the application of contract law to the needs of commerce  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Maritime Law 
  
  
   The module is designed to address the law relating to maritime casualties, their aftermath and transactions associated with shipping.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of several interacting area of law  
    develop an awareness of the contribution of law to crisis management in the context of a maritime casualty  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Public Procurement in EU and International Trade Law 
  
  
   This module examines the regulation of government procurement at international level for the purpose of opening up government markets to free trade.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide a detailed examination of the system under EU Law, which has provided a model for other international systems  
    provide a detailed examination of government procurement regulation in the WTO  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Public Procurement Law 
  
  
   This module examines issues relating to the regulation of public procurement from perspectives other than trade liberalisation. Issues covered include:  
   
    the pursuit of value for money through competition  
    avoidance of corruption  
    outsourcing  
    procurement for privately-financed infrastructure projects  
   
   The module pays particular attention to the UNCITRAL Model Law on procurement and the procurement rules for developing countries' projects financed by the World Bank.  
  
 
     
  
 
   The World Trading System 
  
  
   This module deals with key aspects of World Trade Organisation Law. It focuses on:  
   
    the institutional and organisational structure of the WTO and dispute settlement  
    GATT (dealing with tariffs and other barriers to import of goods)  
    GATS (the agreement regulating international trade in services)   
    rules on unfair trade such as anti-dumping, subsidies and safeguards  
   
   Some attention is also paid to the relationship between regionalism and globalisation and to the issues of preferential trade and development.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    build an understanding of how the World Trading System operates  
    provide an understanding of the challenges of regionalism and development to the World Trading System  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.