Modules  
  A full list of available modules can be found in the Law postgraduate module guide.  
  Qualifying module options  
 
   An Uncensored History of International Law 
  
  
   This module consists of an examination of the major theoretical approaches to Public International Law.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the diverse theoretical approaches to public international law  
    discern the influence of these approaches on the practical development of public international law  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Biodiversity and International Law 
  
  
   This module examines the mechanisms by which international law seeks to protect and conserve biological diversity in terms of species and ecosystems, as well as genetic diversity within species.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the principal treaty regimes, and related scientific, economic and philosophical issues, concerned with the conservation of biological diversity  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Detention and Imprisonment in the International Criminal Justice System 
  
  
   From the history of detention and imprisonment at the post-World War II International Military Tribunals, the course will progress to look at the penal regimes of the contemporary international criminal courts and tribunals, including the ICTY, ICTR, MICT, SCSL and ICC.   
   Students will learn about the systems for and conditions in international remand detention and analyse the complaints and disciplinary procedures and oversight mechanisms operating within these international facilities.   
   Students will also learn about life for international prisoners post-conviction, through an exploration of the various systems used to enforce international sentences of imprisonment.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the systems used to detain and punish persons accused of and convicted for the commission of international crimes by international criminal courts  
    encourages students to critically analyse the custodial systems, standards and oversight mechanisms operating in the international criminal justice system  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   General Themes and Principles of International Environmental Law 
  
  
   The module is designed to elucidate those general themes and principles that have emerged from the substantial body of detailed rules regulating the environment in international law, particularly since the 1972 Stockholm conference on the Human Environment. It will consider the extent to which these rules are evolving into a coherent legal regime.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the general principles and themes which underline the substantive legal regulation of international environmental problems  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Governance of the EU 
  
  
   This half option explores the European Union’s constitutional system and governance structures. We will discuss the unique nature of the EU as an integrated multilevel legal order of European nation states in which, in certain areas, powers have been transferred to federal institutions.  
   Theories of federalism, functionalism and institutionalism will be explored and notions of the legal and political accountability of the EU as a “system of governance” are a core feature of the module. The use of law as a mechanism for integration, and the role of the courts in such a process, will be examined.   
   This subject can be studied as a stand alone half option or as a companion to other modules in the LLM in European Law and Public International Law.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    study the governance of the EU at an advanced level  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Aspect of Corporate Law and Insolvency 
  
  
   The first part of the module focuses on international aspects of company law. Questions examined include:   
   
    whether traditional rules of company law operate properly in the multinational enterprise context  
    whether harmonization of company laws is achievable and whether it is desirable  
   
   The second part focuses on international insolvency, in particular examining global models for cross-border insolvency. Questions examined include:   
   
    where the insolvency proceedings of a multinational enterprise should take place  
    which laws should apply to the global insolvency process?   
    how should the multinational enterprise group in insolvency be dealt with  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide the space to discuss and analyse specific and current issues of company and insolvency law in an international context  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Commercial Arbitration 
  
  
   This module offers the fundamentals of international commercial arbitration, the most important dispute resolution mechanism for international business transactions.  
   The module begins with the legal framework of international commercial arbitration. It then deals with jurisdiction of arbitration tribunals and certain procedural issues arising in arbitration practice. The module ends with the setting aside and recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards.   
   The course focuses mainly on English law of arbitration which is put in comparative perspective and compared and contrasted especially with the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a knowledge and understanding of principles and main rules of international commercial arbitration  
    develop the students’ ability to identify and resolve main issues arising in arbitration practice  
    develop an understanding of the place that international commercial arbitration occupies in commercial practice and how it relates to other dispute resolution mechanisms, especially international commercial litigation  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Consumer Protection 
  
  
   The module examines the role of the law in regulating business and protecting the consumer.   
   It begins by looking at economic and social theories of regulation, identifying what we seek to achieve through regulating, and why regulation is necessary in a competitive market. Next, it examines how we regulate by identifying and critiquing the techniques of regulation. The module then examines how businesses can be held to account through sanctioning, both under the criminal law and in other ways.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    consider the role of law in consumer protection from a global perspective  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Criminal Law 
  
  
   An introduction to international criminal law issues, with particular emphasis on institutions (such as Nuremberg and Tokyo IMTs, the ad hoc Tribunals and the International Criminal Court) as well as substantive and procedural aspects of international criminal law.  
   The module focuses on the institutional developments in international criminal law as well as the definition and application of the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and aggression.   
   Principles of liability, defences and elements of international criminal procedure will also be covered.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop students’ analytical skills in relation of the function, scope and operation of the international criminal justice system and its likely future development, as well as to enable students to apply the law to the various situations  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Financial and Monetary Law 
  
  
   This module focuses on the public law regulation of international financial and monetary relations, and not on the contractual or transactional aspects of international financial markets.  
   It aims to provide a timely and insightful overview of current regulatory developments in the field of capital and current international transactions as well as financial and monetary stability and supervision.   
   The module also considers the role of major institutions in the regulation of international lending and finance for development.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide an understanding of how the international financial and monetary system is regulated  
    describe the key regulatory techniques used in financial and monetary regulation  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Humanitarian Law 
  
  
   The module will examine the essential elements of international humanitarian law – conceptual, institutional and substantive.  
   The course will develop from an introduction and historical overview of international humanitarian law to an examination of the sources of the law. Candidates will then examine the form of armed conflicts in which these laws operate, paying particular attention to such issues as the classification and treatment of combatants, targeting rules and weaponry usage.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the essential elements of international humanitarian law - conceptual, institutional and substantive – in an interactive and flexible manner  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Human Rights Law 
  
  
   This module will introduce students to the law and practice related to international human rights. Students will be encouraged to explore the foundations of international human rights law. The global, regional and national mechanisms of human rights protection will be introduced and evaluated. A selection of substantive human rights will be examined and contemporary challenges to human rights protection will be discussed.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the essential elements of international human rights law - conceptual, institutional and substantive - in an interactive and flexible manner  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Investment Law 
  
  
   This module deals with key aspects of the international system for the regulation of foreign investment. The module focuses primarily on issues arising from investor-host state relations under Bilateral Investment Treaties or BITs and some other International Investment Agreements or IIAs but also touches upon international investment contracts, where relevant.  
   Special attention will be given to the means of regulating investment using such instruments, including standards of treatment and breaches thereof, the taking of foreign property and the settlement of investment disputes by means of arbitration.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop an understanding of how the international system for the regulation of foreign investment and investment arbitration operates in principle and in practice  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Law of the Sea 
  
  
   The module will consider:  
   
    the history and evolution of the law of the sea   
    baselines, internal waters and the territorial sea   
    straits, archipelagos and the contiguous zone  
    the continental shelf and exclusive economic zone   
    the high seas  
    the international seabed area and ice-covered areas  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide participants with knowledge and understanding of the basic legal framework governing use of the seas  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Law of the Use of Force 
  
  
   This module looks at principles and laws governing unilateral and multilateral resort to force by states under the United Nations Charter and in customary international law.  
   Instances where force is permissible will be considered as well as the more controversial claims to use force.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop an understanding of this specialist area of public international law  
    analyse and evaluate the contribution of the legal and political processes to the control and regulation of the use of force  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Law of Transboundary Pollution 
  
  
   The module examines the techniques and mechanisms by which international law seeks to protect the atmosphere and freshwater resources from various forms of pollution.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the major treaty regimes, and fundamental principles of liability, which seek to address problems of transboundary pollution  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Law of Treaties 
  
  
   This module examines the legal regime governing the adoption, implementation, interpretation, amendment and termination of international agreements within the wider context of the role and significance of treaties in the international legal order.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the legal principles governing the adoption and application of international treaties, the theoretical controversies underlying those principles and the role of treaties in international society  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Relations Law of the EU 
  
  
   This module is concerned with the EU's attempts to assert its international identity.  
   Subjects being examined will include:  
   
    the issue of competence and effectiveness of the EU as a global actor  
    the Common Commercial Policy  
    the EU/WTO relationship  
    international development  
    human rights conditions in trade/development agreements  
    common foreign and security policy  
    the EU as a 'regional superpower'  
   
   This module aims to:  
   develop knowledge and understanding of a specialised and constantly evolving area of European Law  
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Law, Development and the International Community 
  
  
   This module examines some of the relationships between law and development. After examining both the notion of development per se and the right to development as a human right, the module moves on to cover a number of individual issues where the relationship between law, development and human rights can be explored.  
   Subjects covered include:  
   
    the concept of development and the role of international law in promoting “development”  
    the regulation of aid  
    the WTO and developing countries  
    intellectual property and access to medication  
    the protection of traditional knowledge  
    agriculture  
    food aid and food security  
    sustainable development  
    gender and development  
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     examine some of the relationships between law and development  
     provide an understanding of the international regulatory system and its impact on developing countries  
    
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Law of International Carriage of Goods by Sea 
  
  
   This module considers the legal regime applicable to the carriage of goods by sea and, in particular, the legal relationship between the shipper (or owner of the goods), the carrier (shipowners) and the recipient (consignee) of the goods shipped.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a knowledge and understanding of the law relating to the international carriage of goods by sea  
    analyse and critically evaluate the most important standard charterparty forms, the bill of lading, and the international conventions affecting sea carriage  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Law of International Trade Finance 
  
  
   The module addresses the private law relating to the financial aspects of international trade, especially payment mechanisms and guarantees.  
   Emphasis is placed upon the rules promulgated by the International Chamber of Commerce.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the private law, both domestic and international, governing financial techniques employed in international trade  
   
  
 
     
  
     
     
 
   Maritime Law 
  
  
   The module is designed to address the law relating to maritime casualties, their aftermath and transactions associated with shipping.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of several interacting area of law  
    develop an awareness of the contribution of law to crisis management in the context of a maritime casualty  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Maritime Security Law 
  
  
   With the codification and development of the international law of the sea during the 20th Century, coastal state maritime security has gained in prominence as an array of maritime zones have been proclaimed, and new sovereign rights and expanded jurisdiction asserted over maritime areas.   
   Alongside this development there has been, since the adoption of the United Nations Charter in 1945, an increasing maritime security dimension to the concerns and response of the Security Council, especially when acting under Chapter VII. The numerous Security Council Resolutions which have mandated naval operations, and more generally military operations to maintain international peace and security, provide clear evidence of this factor.  
   UN mandated naval operations were especially significant in the sanctions regime imposed against Iraq (1990 - 2003) during which time extensive state practice developed in this field. Since then, the Security Council has also mandated member states to conduct military operations at sea to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, international terrorism, and piracy.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate understanding and knowledge, at an advanced level, of the nature and function of maritime security law  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Minorities and International Human Rights 
  
  
   The module aims to provide a thorough grounding in the application of international law standards to minorities and indigenous peoples. There is a strong focus on the decisions of international and European courts and international human rights bodies.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide students with a thorough grounding in the application of international human rights law standards to minorities and indigenous peoples  
    develop the students’ analytical skills in relation of the function, scope and operation of the international human rights standards relevant to minorities and its likely future development  
    develop critical interpretations of international and European human rights jurisprudence relating to minorities and indigenous peoples  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Post-conflict Situations and International Law 
  
  
   This module will examine the international legal problems arising from international involvement in post-conflict situations.  
   While there are established courses and literature on the jus ad bellum (use of force) and the jus in bello (international humanitarian law), the idea and content of a jus post bellum has only in recent years been the subject of intense debate.   
   International interventions in Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan, along with the development of peacekeeping to include peacebuilding (in Cambodia and the Congo for instance), have led to the on-going development of a legal framework to govern the post-conflict stage.   
   This module will endeavour to uncover, understand and evaluate the applicable law, which draws on elements of peacekeeping law, human rights law, humanitarian law, and refugee law, as well as general principles of international law, and emerging ideas such as transitional justice and rule of law.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    explore in detail a crucial and changing area of international law  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Principles of Public International Law 
  
  
   The module is primarily concerned with those customary and treaty rules governing relations between States. This module aims to give candidates a thorough grounding in the principles of PIL. The basic topics include: nature of international law, sources, actors in the international legal system, jurisdiction and state responsibility.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the fundamental principles of Public International Law; to develop an understanding of the structure and development of the international legal system and to understand its wider political context  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Public Procurement in EU and International Trade Law 
  
  
   This module examines the regulation of government procurement at international level for the purpose of opening up government markets to free trade.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide a detailed examination of the system under EU Law, which has provided a model for other international systems  
    provide a detailed examination of government procurement regulation in the WTO  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Public Procurement Law 
  
  
   This module examines issues relating to the regulation of public procurement from perspectives other than trade liberalisation. Issues covered include:  
   
    the pursuit of value for money through competition  
    avoidance of corruption  
    outsourcing  
    procurement for privately-financed infrastructure projects  
   
   The module pays particular attention to the UNCITRAL Model Law on procurement and the procurement rules for developing countries' projects financed by the World Bank.  
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Religion and International Human Rights 
  
  
   The module aims to provide a thorough grounding in the application of international law standards to religion. There is a strong focus on the decisions of international and European courts and international human rights bodies.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide students with a thorough grounding in the application of international human rights law standards to religions and religious believers  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   The European Convention on Human Rights  
  
  
   The module covers articles 2, 3, 5, 6, 8 and 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), together with the procedural provisions of the ECHR.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a critical understanding of the jurisprudence of fundamental rights contained in the European Convention on Human Rights  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   The World Trading System 
  
  
   This module deals with key aspects of World Trade Organisation Law. It focuses on:  
   
    the institutional and organisational structure of the WTO and dispute settlement  
    GATT (dealing with tariffs and other barriers to import of goods)  
    GATS (the agreement regulating international trade in services)   
    rules on unfair trade such as anti-dumping, subsidies and safeguards  
   
   Some attention is also paid to the relationship between regionalism and globalisation and to the issues of preferential trade and development.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    build an understanding of how the World Trading System operates  
    provide an understanding of the challenges of regionalism and development to the World Trading System  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   United Nations Law 
  
  
   This module examines the international institutional law and general international law governing the United Nations, including the central organs (for example the Security Council and General Assembly), subsidiary organs (such as the UNEP and the UNDP), and the specialized agencies (for example the WHO, UNESCO, ICAO).   
   It considers:  
   
    the UN’s constitutional basis  
    its legal personality and powers  
    membership and budgetary matters  
    representation and decision making  
    sanctions regimes  
    the UN's military options  
    issues of responsibility, accountability and immunities  
    the UN’s contribution to the development and enforcement of international law  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide a detailed knowledge of this fundamental area of specialisation in the field of public international law  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.