Modules  
  A full list of available modules can be found in the Law postgraduate module guide.  
  Core modules  
 
   The Law of War and Peace 
  
  
   This compulsory module is designed to give students from different disciplines a grounding in the underlying principles and concepts of international law, in terms of sources, persons, jurisdiction, responsibility and settlement of disputes, but also to place them within the context of two of the central concerns of international law – war and peace.  
   The development of international law from the seventeenth century has been driven by the need to regulate warfare which occurred with significant regularity, and to stabilise the periods of peace that emerged at the end of each conflict. That division still remains in international law, though for a number of decades after the Second World War the law of war was seen as a junior partner to the law of peace.  
   The module will assess whether that relationship has been changed by events such as 9/11 and the response to terrorism, the on-going conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq, and the advent of the International Criminal Court.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide a solid understanding of the international legal order, and the key concepts underpinning it  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Core modules from the School of Politics:  
  
   Terrorism and Insurgencies  
  
  Optional modules    
  
  
    Detention and Imprisonment in the International Criminal Justice System 
   
  
  
   From the history of detention and imprisonment at the post-World War II International Military Tribunals, the course will progress to look at the penal regimes of the contemporary international criminal courts and tribunals, including the ICTY, ICTR, MICT, SCSL and ICC.   
   Students will learn about the systems for and conditions in international remand detention and analyse the complaints and disciplinary procedures and oversight mechanisms operating within these international facilities.   
   Students will also learn about life for international prisoners post-conviction, through an exploration of the various systems used to enforce international sentences of imprisonment.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the systems used to detain and punish persons accused of and convicted for the commission of international crimes by international criminal courts  
    encourages students to critically analyse the custodial systems, standards and oversight mechanisms operating in the international criminal justice system  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Criminal Law 
  
  
   An introduction to international criminal law issues, with particular emphasis on institutions (such as Nuremberg and Tokyo IMTs, the ad hoc Tribunals and the International Criminal Court) as well as substantive and procedural aspects of international criminal law.  
   The module focuses on the institutional developments in international criminal law as well as the definition and application of the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and aggression.   
   Principles of liability, defences and elements of international criminal procedure will also be covered.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop students’ analytical skills in relation of the function, scope and operation of the international criminal justice system and its likely future development, as well as to enable students to apply the law to the various situations  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Humanitarian Law 
  
  
   The module will examine the essential elements of international humanitarian law – conceptual, institutional and substantive.  
   The course will develop from an introduction and historical overview of international humanitarian law to an examination of the sources of the law. Candidates will then examine the form of armed conflicts in which these laws operate, paying particular attention to such issues as the classification and treatment of combatants, targeting rules and weaponry usage.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the essential elements of international humanitarian law - conceptual, institutional and substantive – in an interactive and flexible manner  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Human Rights Law 
  
  
   This module will introduce students to the law and practice related to international human rights. Students will be encouraged to explore the foundations of international human rights law. The global, regional and national mechanisms of human rights protection will be introduced and evaluated. A selection of substantive human rights will be examined and contemporary challenges to human rights protection will be discussed.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the essential elements of international human rights law - conceptual, institutional and substantive - in an interactive and flexible manner  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Law on the Use of Force 
  
  
   This module looks at principles and laws governing unilateral and multilateral resort to force by states under the United Nations Charter and in customary international law.  
   Instances where force is permissible will be considered as well as the more controversial claims to use force.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop an understanding of this specialist area of public international law  
    analyse and evaluate the contribution of the legal and political processes to the control and regulation of the use of force  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Post-Conflict Situations and International Law 
  
  
   This module will examine the international legal problems arising from international involvement in post-conflict situations.  
   While there are established courses and literature on the jus ad bellum (use of force) and the jus in bello (international humanitarian law), the idea and content of a jus post bellum has only in recent years been the subject of intense debate.   
   International interventions in Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan, along with the development of peacekeeping to include peacebuilding (in Cambodia and the Congo for instance), have led to the on-going development of a legal framework to govern the post-conflict stage.   
   This module will endeavour to uncover, understand and evaluate the applicable law, which draws on elements of peacekeeping law, human rights law, humanitarian law, and refugee law, as well as general principles of international law, and emerging ideas such as transitional justice and rule of law.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    explore in detail a crucial and changing area of international law  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   United Nations Law 
  
  
   This module examines the international institutional law and general international law governing the United Nations, including the central organs (for example the Security Council and General Assembly), subsidiary organs (such as the UNEP and the UNDP), and the specialized agencies (for example the WHO, UNESCO, ICAO).   
   It considers:  
   
    the UN’s constitutional basis  
    its legal personality and powers  
    membership and budgetary matters  
    representation and decision making  
    sanctions regimes  
    the UN's military options  
    issues of responsibility, accountability and immunities  
    the UN’s contribution to the development and enforcement of international law  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide a detailed knowledge of this fundamental area of specialisation in the field of public international law  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Qualifying module options from the School of Politics:  
  
   Contemporary Warfare  
   Europe and the Developing World  
   Grand Strategy  
   Russia in the World Today  
   The Theory and Practice of Diplomacy  
   War, Peace and Terror  
   Western Counter-Terrorism Cooperation  
  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.