Modules  
  A full list of available modules can be found in our Geography postgraduate module guide  
  Core modules    
 
   Approaches to Landscape 
  
  
   This module provides an introduction to recent research on landscape, drawing on studies and materials from several disciplines.  
   Areas of research considered include:   
   
    landscape in cultural geography  
    landscape and the arts and humanities  
   
   The module considers historical and contemporary evidence under each of these headings and allows a critical assessment of both empirical research and underlying theory.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    consider the relationship between cultural landscapes and the social, economic, political and ideological forces that are sustained by and reflected in these landscapes, using evidence from a variety of historical and geographical contexts  
    critically assess empirical studies of particular landscapes in the light of recent theoretical work in geography and beyond  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Critical Human Geography 
  
  
   The module introduces students to a range of philosophical approaches and current research themes within human geography. It enables them to integrate questions of theory and empirical research, each stage of the module stressing the philosophy underpinning the research under discussion, and the cultural and political contexts of the research.  
   Key thematic issues structure the module, including geographical understandings of culture and economy, and the geographies of nature. Each section of the module integrates historical and contemporary understanding, emphasising the distinctive contribution made by human geography in thinking spatially, while at the same time highlighting geography's relationship to the social sciences, natural sciences and humanities.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    give an understanding of the theoretical basis of critical human geography, showing how and why ideas have developed, and how these ideas have been applied in the analysis of particular subject matter  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Dissertation: Landscape and Culture 
  
  
   This dissertation represents the culmination of the Landscape and Culture MA. Each student is required to submit a 15,000 to 20,000 word dissertation within 12 months of their initial registration.  
   The precise nature of the dissertation (the empirical content and theoretical perspectives) will obviously vary, but all dissertations must be a substantial research-based document on a specific topic that will have been discussed and approved by a nominated supervisor from within the teaching team on this course early in Semester II.   
   Meetings between students and supervisors will take place regularly from the beginning of Semester II until the main period of research and data collection during the summer. A minimum of five supervisions will take place. Each student is also advised about the required format of the dissertation.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    allow students to devise and carry out a substantial piece of empirical research on an approved topic  
   
  
 
     
  
  Optional modules  
  Students not on the ESRC DTC pathway must take:    
 
   Research Design B 
  
  
   The module takes the form of weekly seminars in which the following topics are covered:   
   
    introduction to research design  
    'subjects' and research  
    research methods  
    qualitative analysis  
    group project  
    evaluating qualitative research  
    writing strategies  
    research plans for dissertations  
   
   Students write a report on their group project. They also write a full research plan, and make an individual presentation of this plan.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide an introduction to research design skills  
    provide students with a thorough grounding in research techniques for the masters dissertation research  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Students not on the ESRC DTC pathway must select 30 credits of optional modules (to total 180), either provided by the School of Geography, or in other schools across the University, with the agreement of the Course Director.  
  Students on the ESRC DTC pathway must take:  
 
   Geographical Research Methods 
  
  
  
    This module is split into 3 major sections: 
   
   
   
    
     Quantitative methods: An introduction to parametric and non-parametric statistics and the use of databases and statistical packages  
     Social Research Methods: An introduction to the philosophical and analytical issues that lie behind designing social research methods. A range of social research methods are considered in terms of their approach, design, implementation and analysis  
     GIS: An introduction to the technologies of GIS. They cover the design and operation of these systems and how they are used as decision support tools. The material also covers the concept of modelling and what issues the user must be aware of in evaluating model outputs  
    
   
     This 
    module aims to: 
    
    
    
     
      
       offer an understanding of the issues and techniques surrounding the handling of quantitative and qualitative data in the social and environmental sciences  
      
     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Philosophy of Research - Social Science 
  
  
  
    This module splits into three key parts: 
   
   
   
    
     science and the philosophical critique of science  
     epistemological debates in the social sciences   
     the funding environment - interdisciplinarity and the impact agenda  
    
   
     This 
    module aims to: 
    
    
    
     
      enable students to analyse the epistemological and ontological issues that arise from different social and philosophical theories and their impact on social research methodologies  
     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Design A 
  
  
  
    The module takes the form of weekly seminars, in which the following core topics are covered: 
   
   
   
    
     introduction to research design  
     research ethics  
     writing strategies  
     research plans for dissertations  
     positionality and reflexivity  
    
   
     This 
    module aims to: 
    
    
    
     
      provide an introduction to research design skills within the discipline of Geography  
      thoroughly prepare students for the dissertation  
     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Space and Social Theory 
  
  
  
    The module provides an introduction to space and social theory. It is compulsory for masters students taking the ESRC 1+3 route.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module will provide an introduction to a range of theoretical approaches within the social sciences, focusing upon the work of selected thinkers. The model will take the form of fortnightly seminars, focusing upon the work of some of the following (and others), and its relationship to geographical research: 
   
   
   
    
     Haraway  
     Harvey  
     Foucault  
     Latour  
     Said  
     Comte  
     Polanyi  
    
   
     This 
    module aims to: 
    
    
    
     
      give an understanding of the main theories and philosophies of social science, showing how and why ideas have developed, and how these ideas have been applied in the analysis of particular subject matter  
      seek to understand the relationship of philosophy and social theory to human geography, and its impact upon research  
     
    
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.