Modules  
  1) Students take the module:  
  Research in Literary Linguistics (15 credits, Autumn Semester)  
  This module explores the use of linguistic frameworks to investigate literary texts. Through a series of practical analyses, students will be introduced to a range of linguistic explorations of poetry, prose, and drama from a wide range of historical periods. The module will invite students to use the analyses as an occasion for the critical evaluation of the various approaches to language and literature, to investigate the notions of literariness and interpretation, and to consider the scope and validity of stylistics in relation to literature and literary studies. The range of key research methods and methodologies in stylistics will be studied.  
  2) Students choose between 60 and 105 credits from this group:  
 
   Consciousness in Fiction (15 credits, Autumn Semester)  
  
 
   The module will explore in depth techniques for the presentation of consciousness in novels and other fictional texts. Students will learn about the linguistic indices associated with the point of view of characters and the various modes available to a writer for the presentation of characters’ thoughts and perceptions. Alongside detailed examinations of narrative texts which portray consciousness, students will also study different theories put forward to explain the nature of writing consciousness in texts. Our stylistic analyses of fictional minds will also aim to account for historical changes in the techniques used for consciousness presentation. 
  
 
     
  
 
   Intercultural Communication (15 credits, Autumn Semester)  
  
 
   This module will explore the use of language in interactions between speakers of different cultural and linguistic backgrounds from three different perspectives: 
  Description, Development, and Assessment. With a growing proportion of interactions in the world today taking place between people of diverse cultural backgrounds, it is important to identify and describe language use which may lead to misunderstanding and communicative breakdown. This module will look at ways in which language barriers might be overcome in such interactions, and at the key factors in this process. We will examine intercultural interactions in a variety of contexts, e.g. business and other professional encounters, the language of the media, the language classroom, etc. 
  
 
     
  
 
   Old English Texts I (15 credits, Autumn Semester)  
  
 
   A knowledge of Old English is crucial to the in-depth study of the history and development of the English language, English place-names, culture and society in pre-modern England. This module offers students the opportunity to explore the literary ideas and culture of Anglo-Saxon England through the study of selected original texts. Using Peter Baker’s Introduction to Old English, the module will introduce basic elements of Old English grammar and syntax to prepare students for reading and enjoying the texts. Wide reading of texts in translation, and discussion of poetry and prose in the light of historical and critical scholarship will form an important part of the module.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Fiction: Form & Context (15 credits, Autumn Semester)  
  
 
   This module explores the structures, techniques, and methodologies of fiction through both creative and analytical practice. Students examine a range of international fiction from a writer’s perspective, with an emphasis on craft. Assignments include creative exercises of imitation or modelling, as well as direct responses to works of fiction in ways that demonstrate a practical understanding of their qualities. Analytical writing focuses on the functional aspects of selected works. Particular issues for consideration might include narrative voice and technique, point of view, character development, dialogue, plot, and setting. Students consider not only the elements of fiction, but also how those elements contribute to overall structure of a narrative.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Dramatic Discourse (15 credits, Spring Semester) 
  
 
   This module explores the relationship between language and drama. Taking a multi-faceted approach, drawing on facets of linguistic analysis from stylistics, discourse analysis and sociolinguistics, the module considers the role of language in moving dramatic scripts from page to stage, exploring aspects of characterisation (such as identity, power and provocation), the role of language in story-telling on stage and the 'management' of performance through stage directions. Working with a range of texts from the early modern period to the present day, the module investigates the role of language in shaping character, dialogue, interaction and staging. 
  
 
     
  
 
   Cognition and Literature (15 credits, Spring Semester) 
  
 
   This module represents a course in cognitive poetics. It draws on insights developed in cognitive science, especially in psychology and linguistics, in order to develop an understanding of the processes involved in literary reading. The module also develops skills in stylistics and critical theory. 
  
 
     
  
 
   Language and Gender (15 credits, Spring Semester)  
  
 
   The course will explore the relationship between language and gender in spoken interaction and written texts, drawing on key approaches in the areas of discourse analysis, sociolinguistics and pragmatics. The extent to which gender affects the language we produce when interacting with one another in a variety of contexts will be focused on, along with the issue of sexism in language use. Various theoretical paradigms that have been presented to explain language and gender differences will be critically examined, along with gender ideologies which operate in society. Students will be encouraged to combine theoretical thinking with hands-on analyses of data from authentic examples of spoken interaction and from a variety of publications including the popular media. The practical consequences of the discipline in terms of how findings can have a political impact on wider society are also discussed.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Methods: Corpus Linguistics (15 credits, Spring Semester)  
  
 
   Corpus linguistics provides methods for the study of collections of electronic texts (written texts, including literary texts, material from the internet, transcripts of spoken language, etc.). This module introduces fundamental corpus methods that include retrieving and interpreting word frequency information, studying patterns of words in the form of concordances, and analysing key words and key semantic domains. The module will explain basic concepts and illustrate methods through case studies. Through hands-on sessions students will actively practice the use of corpus software. Throughout the module, students are encouraged to reflect on the applicability of a range of methods to their own areas of interest (e.g. literary linguistics, discourse analysis, ELT, etc.). For the assessment, students will complete a small-scale corpus project on a topic of their own choosing (in consultation with the tutor). This project can function to test ideas that might be further developed in the dissertation. 
  
 
     
  
 
     
  
  
   
    3) Students can then choose modules from any of those in the School of English (subject to convenor's agreement)  
   
  
  These include modules in the areas of: applied linguistics, English language, medieval studies, Viking & Anglo-Saxon studies, creative writing and English literature. Some optional modules may have pre-requisites; if so, these are specified in the module catalogue.  
  Further details on our modules can be found in the Module Catalogue.  
  Students choose their modules at the beginning of the Autumn Semester.  
  Please note that all modules are subject to availability.