Modules  
  A full list of available modules can be found in the Law postgraduate module guide.  
  Qualifying module options  
 
   EU Competition Law 
  
  
  
    The module examines the legal regulation of competition within the single and free market of the EU and serves as an introduction to basic legal and economic principles as well as to detailed study of the rules of Union law which seek to outlaw competitive behaviour. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     provide an advanced level course on the European Union Competition Law  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Commercial Arbitration
   
  
  
   This module offers the fundamentals of international commercial arbitration, the most important dispute resolution mechanism for international business transactions.  
   The module begins with the legal framework of international commercial arbitration. It then deals with jurisdiction of arbitration tribunals and certain procedural issues arising in arbitration practice. The module ends with the setting aside and recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards.   
   The course focuses mainly on English law of arbitration which is put in comparative perspective and compared and contrasted especially with the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a knowledge and understanding of principles and main rules of international commercial arbitration  
    develop the students’ ability to identify and resolve main issues arising in arbitration practice  
    develop an understanding of the place that international commercial arbitration occupies in commercial practice and how it relates to other dispute resolution mechanisms, especially international commercial litigation  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Law of the Sea 
  
  
   The module will consider:  
   
    the history and evolution of the law of the sea   
    baselines, internal waters and the territorial sea   
    straits, archipelagos and the contiguous zone  
    the continental shelf and exclusive economic zone   
    the high seas  
    the international seabed area and ice-covered areas  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide participants with knowledge and understanding of the basic legal framework governing use of the seas  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   International Sale of Goods 
  
  
   This module deals with international sales of goods, as they are conducted in the international commodity markets according to the rules of English law. It does not cover the United Nations Convention on the International Sale of Goods 1980 and similar instruments.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the international sale of goods in those cases where English law is the applicable law of contract  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Law of International Carriage of Goods by Sea 
  
  
   This module considers the legal regime applicable to the carriage of goods by sea and, in particular, the legal relationship between the shipper (or owner of the goods), the carrier (shipowners) and the recipient (consignee) of the goods shipped.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a knowledge and understanding of the law relating to the international carriage of goods by sea  
    analyse and critically evaluate the most important standard charterparty forms, the bill of lading, and the international conventions affecting sea carriage  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Law of International Trade Finance 
  
  
   The module addresses the private law relating to the financial aspects of international trade, especially payment mechanisms and guarantees.  
   Emphasis is placed upon the rules promulgated by the International Chamber of Commerce.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the private law, both domestic and international, governing financial techniques employed in international trade  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Law of Marine Insurance 
  
  
   This module addresses the law relating to the contractual provision of marine insurance, particularly insurance of hulls and cargo, by the London insurance market. Considerable emphasis is placed upon the contractual clauses promulgated by the International Underwriting Association of London.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge of the law of marine insurance and its contribution to the private law of international trade   
    build an understanding of the application of contract law to the needs of commerce  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Maritime Law 
  
  
   The module is designed to address the law relating to maritime casualties, their aftermath and transactions associated with shipping.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of several interacting area of law  
    develop an awareness of the contribution of law to crisis management in the context of a maritime casualty  
   
  
 
     
  
     
 
   Maritime Security Law 
  
  
   With the codification and development of the international law of the sea during the 20th Century, coastal state maritime security has gained in prominence as an array of maritime zones have been proclaimed, and new sovereign rights and expanded jurisdiction asserted over maritime areas.   
   Alongside this development there has been, since the adoption of the United Nations Charter in 1945, an increasing maritime security dimension to the concerns and response of the Security Council, especially when acting under Chapter VII. The numerous Security Council Resolutions which have mandated naval operations, and more generally military operations to maintain international peace and security, provide clear evidence of this factor.  
   UN mandated naval operations were especially significant in the sanctions regime imposed against Iraq (1990 - 2003) during which time extensive state practice developed in this field. Since then, the Security Council has also mandated member states to conduct military operations at sea to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, international terrorism, and piracy.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate understanding and knowledge, at an advanced level, of the nature and function of maritime security law  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.