Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, some of the following list of modules may change:  
  
   Typical year one modules (first 18 months)  
  
  
   
    Problem-Based Learning Course  
   
   
    During the first 18 months in Derby, you will undertake a Problem-Based Learning (PBL) course in which you will work in small groups to explore clinical scenarios using case studies. Throughout this period, all students are based in a purpose-built medical school on the Royal Derby Hospital campus. Early Clinical Experience will be provided in clinical settings and personal and professional development is encouraged. Following the initial 18 months, you will progress onto the Clinical Phases of the course, combining with students from A100 and participating in the same modules and attachments across a variety of clinical sites in the East Midlands.   
   
  
      
   
   
    Clinical and Professional Development I and II  
   
   
    This module aims to introduce you to the knowledge, skills and attitudes that you will require to practice clinical medicine. These are a necessary pre-requisite for practising clinical medicine; the OSCE exam and the module overall must be passed to continue your studies.  In part II, you will practice basic clinical skills within the context of the professional settings and framework in which you will work. Clinical attachments in primary and secondary care are supported by regular seminars and practical sessions in order to introduce, rehearse and reinforce relevant knowledge, skills and attitudes.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  
   Typical year two modules  
  
  
   
    Clinical Practice  
   
   
    This 17-week intensive module is delivered via a combination of ward-based placements in NHS Trusts within the East Midlands and University-based teaching delivered centrally. You’ll be building on previous learning whilst acquiring knowledge, skills and attitudes required for assessment and management of patients with a core spectrum of clinical presentations and conditions. This will predominantly be within a hospital setting (wards, out-patients, and operating theatres) but also some in community practice (GP surgeries).  
   
  
      
   
   
    Community Follow-Up Project  
   
   
    The community follow-up project provides a unique opportunity for students to evaluate medical care across the primary/secondary care interface by focusing on the individual experiences of one particular patient. During clinical phase I (Clinical Practice) pairs of students will choose one patient to evaluate their health care experience. You’ll be expected to discuss the patient's total experience of illness, its psychological, social and physical effects, and how the process of care has affected them and their family. This will provide you with information to compile a written project and presentation based on your learning from patients’ experiences.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Therapeutics  
   
   
    In this module you’ll have some generic sessions relating to pharmacology and prescribing/drug choice covering six key areas: hypertension and Ischaemic heart disease, heart failure, respiratory diseases, gastrointestinal and hepatic disorders, metabolic disorders and central nervous system disorders. Therapeutics (THP) enables students to acquire an understanding of core disease management. You’ll study clinical pharmacology to build on previous knowledge and studying for this module will be via online resources and independent study.  
   
  
      
   
   
    The Treatment and Prevention of Infection  
   
   
    In this module you’ll build on previous learning to acquire knowledge, skills and attitudes of direct clinical relevance for the management of infection, particularly in a hospital setting. The module is divided into three parts; the general properties of antimicrobial agents, the general principles of the management of infection and antimicrobial chemotherapy in practice. You’ll have around nine hours per week of lectures, the majority of which are delivered by consultant microbiologists, or an antimicrobial pharmacist, from a local partner hospital.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  
   Typical year three modules  
  
  
  
    Child Health 
   
   
    During this module you’ll be building on previous learning and acquiring knowledge, skills and attitudes required for assessment and management of children with a core spectrum of clinical presentations and conditions. This will predominantly be within a hospital setting (wards, outpatients, operating theatres) but will also spend time in a community setting (clinics, schools, and nurseries). You’ll have a two-day introductory course before you begin your paediatric placements. These will consist of a clinical attachment with a consultant led firm in a paediatric unit, a one week attachment with paediatricians based in the community and a one week attachment with paediatric surgeons.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Obstetrics and Gynaecology  
   
   
    In this module you’ll build your knowledge from previous learning on human reproductive biology and on some of the epidemiological and behavioural patterns of human sexuality and reproduction. You’ll be provided with an opportunity to study in and experience a clinical environment, observing the normal and abnormal processes of child bearing and the disorders both functional and organic of the human reproductive system. The teaching of genito-urinary medicine is also incorporated into the attachment. This module will take place in a 10-week block of learning predominantly within wards, out-patients, and operating theatres, but also some in community practice (at community gynaecology clinics and some community midwifery clinics).  
   
  
      
   
   
    Psychiatry  
   
   
    This module teaches you the knowledge and skills relating to psychiatric theory and practice. You’ll have the opportunity to apply your learning in a clinical environment on your placement following an intensive introductory programme. In addition, you’ll develop appropriate attitudes and approaches to respond to individuals with psychological distress and mental disorders. This will be achieved through the clinical attachment, weekly central teaching, problem-based tasks and small group teaching.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Health Care of the Elderly  
   
   
    During this module you will have an intensive block of learning in the speciality fields of geriatric medicine, old age psychiatry (OAP) and gerontology. You’ll have a three-day class-based introduction to the specifics of the field before your three-week clinical attachment begins. You’ll cover clinical problems, ethical issues and multidisciplinary working. There is a community focus, from a rehabilitation perspective and you’ll deal with complex disability and continuing care.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Dermatology, Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology (Specials)  
   
   
    During this module you’ll be building on previous learning and acquiring knowledge, skills and attitudes required for assessment and management of patients with a core spectrum of clinical presentations and conditions, in each specialty. This will take place within the hospital setting, predominantly in speciality clinics. The clinics will be based in dermatology, ophthalmology and ear-nose-throat departments.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Special Study  
   
   
    This module is designed to allow you to choose an area of specialty that you are interested in. Special Study Modules (SSM's) are an integral part of the Nottingham curriculum, enabling you to demonstrate certain mandatory competences while allowing choice in studying an area of particular interest to them. The purpose of the SSM's is the intellectual development of students through exploring in depth a subject of their choice. They also offer an opportunity for students to demonstrate attainment of professional behaviour. You’ll be based predominantly be within clinical settings (eg clinic, ward, emergency department, operating theatre, multidisciplinary team meeting) and in some cases there will be time spent in clinical and/or research laboratories, small group teaching and tutorials, depending on the nature of individual SSMs.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  
   Typical year four modules  
  
  
   
    Advanced Clinical Experience  
   
   
    The ACE module takes place over a 32-week period of four 8-week blocks of learning in Clinical Phase 3 of the medicine course. It comprises attachments in Senior Medicine (8 weeks), Senior Surgery(8 weeks), Musculo-skeletal Disorders and Disabilities (MDD)(8 weeks), Primary Care (General Practice) (4 weeks)and a Critical Illness attachment (4 weeks). The main focus is on prevalent symptoms and diseases that target the major body systems: cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, urinogenital, lymphoreticular, endocrine, musculoskeletal and nervous systems. Because of common co-morbidity, the opportunity to assess patients with prevalent conditions of all major systems is afforded by each Clinical Attachment. Learning is intended to centre more on the patient than the specialty.  Final exams take place after ACE.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Transition to Practice  
   
   
    This purpose of this module is to prepare you for professional life by linking you final academic year of BMBS to you becoming a first year Foundation Doctor. This experiential 15 week period covers the clinical assistantship, elective study period, Foundation Year 1 preparation course and shadowing an F1 doctor at the hospital in your first post as a junior doctor.  This module comprises Careers events, Foundation Year 1 Preparation Course, Medical Assistantship (MAST) and Elective Period. MAST takes place over 6 weeks; students are allocated to a site, specialty and firm working with a current FY1 doctor. For the Elective period, a period of 7 weeks is allowed, of which, a minimum of 6 weeks (which must include at least 240 contact hours) attendance at your approved elective institution(s) is required.  You will be applying previous learning in the assessment and management of patients. The level attained will be that expected of an FY1 doctor at the start of their employment. This will be workplace-based learning with assessment by portfolio and logbook review.