Modules  
  The MSc will consist of eight taught modules and a laboratory-based project. Candidates will attend two full days of lectures per week prior to starting their research project, with the remaining time available for associated work. The research project is carried out on a full-time basis in semester two.  
  Successful completion of the course will necessitate accumulation of 180 credits, 120 of which will derive from the taught modules and 60 from the research project.  
  Autumn semester  
  
   
    Introduction to Molecular Biology Research (22 hours, 20 credits)  
    This course is a 20-credit module and is taught in semester one. A combination of practical sessions and lectures will be used to teach fundamental principles of genetics, basic statistical methods and aspects of planning research. The practical techniques will cover techniques such as polymerase chain reaction, DNA sequencing and methods for mutation detection and genotyping:  
    
     Critical analysis of scientific papers  
     Laboratory mathematics  
     How to plan, document and write up research  
     The polymerase chain reaction  
     Principles of genetics  
     Genotyping  
     Sequencing and capillary electrophoresis  
     Sequence analysis  
     Presentation skills and PowerPoint for posters  
     Mutation detection and screening  
     Methods for DNA cloning  
    
    Assessment for this module includes a critical analysis of a scientific paper (20%), write-up of the practical sessions (20%) and a multiple choice exam (60%).  
    Molecular Basis of Genetic Disorders (24 hours, 20 credits)  
    This course is taught as a 20-credit module in semester one. The module covers the molecular mechanisms for human diseases with a genetic component, including those which have a Mendelian pattern of inheritance and those with a complex mode of inheritance. The lectures will cover clinical features of selected diseases and their genetic basis. The seminars will provide experience in interpreting genetic tests in inherited disorders, and opportunities to discuss the concepts underlying the identification of predisposing genes in human disorders:  
    
     Principles of Mendelian inheritance  
     Seminar 1: Pedigree analysis  
     Autosomal recessive disorders  
     Seminar 2: Data interpretation (point mutations)  
     X-linked recessive disorders  
     Seminar 3: Data interpretation: Linkage analysis  
     Autosomal dominant disorders  
     Seminar 4: Data interpretation: large deletions; dynamic mutations  
     Disorders with partial penetrance  
     Seminar 5: Data interpretation: Thrombophilias; haemochromatosis  
     Mitochondrial disorders  
     Genetic imprinting  
     Concepts of genetically complex diseases  
     Seminar 6: Epidemiology - relative risk; heritability  
     Genetics of diabetes: a paradigm for complex genetic disorders  
     Seminar 7: Lessons from genetic studies of diabetes  
     Complex disorders linked to the HLA region  
     Seminar 8: Linkage analysis in the study of complex disorders  
     Genetics of cancer  
     Seminar 9: Genetic association studies  
     Seminar 10: Linkage disequilibrium; GWAS  
     Genetics of Alzheimer's disease  
     Genetics of colorectal cancer  
     Seminar 11: Alternative study designs + Module review  
    
    The assessment consists of a final exam, containing both multiple choice and short-answer written questions.  
    Gene Regulation in Mammalian Cells (13 hours, 10 credits)  
    This is a 10-credit module delivered in semester one which introduces the structure of eukaryotic genes and mechanisms of gene regulation. Topics include gene structure, chromatin remodeling, DNA/Protein and Protein/Protein interactions, and the role of gene regulation in disease:  
    
     Structure of Eukaryotic genes  
     Chromatin remodelling  
     Regulation of mRNA abundance  
     Small RNAs in biology and medicine  
     DNA-protein and protein-protein interactions  
     Research methods for studying gene regulation  
     Research methods - Tutorial  
     Gene Regulation and disease  
    
    This module is assessed by an essagy of around 4000 words.  
    Statistics (18 hours, 10 credits)  
    This course is a 10-credit module held in semester one which will enable students to become familiar with basic statistical methods. The material will be taught in a series of computer-based practical sessions. By the end of the module students will be able to use the statistical software package SPSS to analyse data using appropriate statistical tests:  
    
     Introduction to statistics  
     Using statistical packages and entering data into SPSS  
     Types of research study  
     Descriptive comparison of groups  
     Exploring data in SPSS  
     Bias and confounding  
     Introduction to hypothesis testing  
     Comparing continuous data in SPSS  
     Evaluating & summarising the evidence  
     Comparing categorical data in SPSS  
     Correlation and regression analysis  
    
    The module is assessed by an exam (50%) and a statistical report (50%). For the report, students are provided with a dataset to analyse using the methods covered in the module. In addition, students have to demonstrate that they are capable of designing and setting up a data file in SPSS which is submitted electronically.  
    Spring semester  
    
     
      Bioinformatics (15 hours, 10 credits)  
      Taught together with students from the MSc Immunology and Allergy, this 10-credit module is held in semester two. This module will enable students to obtain practical experience in using advanced bioinformatics software available for the analysis of genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic data:  
      
       Introduction to bioinformatics  
       Sequence interpretation, annotation and variation  
       Investigating the transcriptome  
       Protein structure and function prediction  
       Proteome analysis and protein interaction networks  
       Implications for Human Health  
       IT sessions  
       Seminars  
      
      The module is taught using a combination of lectures and practical sessions. Students are required to produce a poster for assessment which includes information gathered from online databases and analysis of a nucleic acid sequence. There is also an associated short report which documents the process taken to analyse the sequence and produce the poster.  
      Molecular Services in Health Care (12 hours, 10 credits)  
      This course is a 10-credit module taught in semester two. Topics include the following: setting up a molecular diagnostics laboratory, ethical issues and genetic counseling, cytogenetic techniques, prenatal diagnosis and diagnosis of microbial infections:  
      
       The impact of molecular diagnosis  
       Establishing a molecular diagnostics laboratory  
       Cytogenetics  
       Genetic counselling sessions  
       Pre-natal diagnosis  
       Pre-implantation diagnosis  
       Phenylketonuria and screening  
       Familial hypercholesterolemia and screening  
       Molecular diagnosis and cellular pathology  
      
      Assessment is via an essay of around 4000 words.    
      Microbial Genetics and Genomics (24 hours, 20 credits)  
      This 20-credit module is taught in semester two. It will provide an overview of genetic and genomic approaches to the study and diagnosis of bacterial and viral pathogens, including a global overview of the regulation of pathogenesis in Prokaryotes. The taught courses cover the following subjects:  
      
       Introduction to basic microbiology  
       The use of basic microbiological and molecular techniques to identify bacterial and viral pathogens  
       An overview of the structure and organisation of bacterial genomes  
       Quorum sensing  
       The role of bacterial virulence factors in infection.  
       The regulation of expression of Staphylococcus aureus virulence determinants  
       PBL - Using genetic tools to diagnose MRSA  
       The regulation of expression of bacterial virulence determinants  
       An overview of the structure and organisation of viral genomes  
       Introduction to the regulation of expression of viral virulence determinants  
       The genetics of Human Immunodeficiency Virus 1 as an example of an RNA virus infection  
       Genetics of Hepatitis B virus as an example of a DNA virus infection  
       The role of host genetics in virus infections  
       PBL - Isolation and genetic typing of viral infections  
       A brief overview of some notable clinically relevant pathogens  
       Artemis and Artemis Comparison tool  
       PBL - Gene and protein sequence analysis  
      
      The module is composed of a combination of lectures delivered by experts covering the latest knowledge in their respective fields with additional problem-based learning (PBL) sessions giving students the opportunity to investigate and solve realistic situations.    
      Molecular Technologies (32 hours, 20 credits)  
      This 20-credit course is held in semester two, and will provide an extensive review of emerging molecular techniques used in research of human diseases. Topics include: real-time PCR, microarrays, methods for diagnosis of infectious diseases and mutation detection:  
      
       Molecular Genetics and Disease  
       Student session - Setting Assessment and Discussion  
       Student session - Living with her genes  
       Student session - The Hap Map Resource  
       Student session - Copy Number Variation (CNV)  
       Pharmacogenetics  
       Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA)  
       Student session - High Throughput Technologies  
       Chips and Microarrays  
       Student Session - Genome Wide Association Studies  
       Deep Sequencing  
       Proteomic aspects of disease  
       Sequence analysis and mutation detection  
       Genotype/Phenotype correlations  
       Student session - Assessments  
       New frontiers  
      
      The module is delivered using a combination of lectures with additional student-led sessions. For these sessions, students are provided with a question or topic which they have to research and present. Assessment is by multiple choice exam (60%) and a group project (40%).  
      Research Project (60 credits)  
      Students will carry out their own research projects during spring and summer, in areas and topics determined by members of academic staff. The experimental part of the projects is carried out within the laboratories where research is being performed by other MSc and PhD students, post-doctoral fellows and technicians which are always keen to provide help and support. The aim is for students to develop their practical and intellectual skills in scientific investigation, and gain experience of project and time management. Project reports will be written up in the style of an original research paper, giving the student further hands-on experiences in writing scientific publications.  
      Specifically the project will enable students to:  
      
       Demonstrate ability to research, and apply to the practical investigation, relevant research literature from a variety of sources, in an area appropriate to the course.  
       Design experiments to yield interpretable results, to analyse and interpret data obtained and, on this basis, choose appropriate lines of further investigation.  
       Carry out and develop safe and effective research practice.  
       Present and discuss the merits and weaknesses of the investigative approach, and identify future research avenues using both oral and written techniques.  
      
      Students will spend 400-750 hours in the laboratory for the duration of the project.  
      During the this period, students and their supervisors are expected to meet informally on a regular basis to discuss progress and complete four formally documented meetings.  
      Preparation of the dissertation will normally take 100 hours across the duration of the module. Examples of some recent research projects include:  
      
       Investigation of splicing mutations in bleeding disorders  
       Investigation of F8 gene deletions in haemophilia A  
       Molecular screening for oesophageal cancer  
       Mapping functional elements in the SerpinA1 promoter  
       Translational efficiency of SerpinA1 alternative transcripts  
       Copy number variation (CNV) and Alzheimer's disease  
       Haplotypes of the epidermal growth factor gene and intrauterine growth  
       Multiplex FISH Analysis in leukaemia  
       Examining quorum sensing gene expression using lux-based promoter fusions in Yersinia pseudotuberculosis  
       Novel signalling molecules involved in global control of gene expression in Pseudomonas aeruginosa  
       Identification and function of small regulatory RNAs in pathogenic Clostridia  
      
      Assessment of the project is as follows:  
      • Supervisor mark for practical skills (20%)  
      • Research presentation and questions (40%)  
      • Dissertation (40%)  
      For more details on our modules, please see our module catalogue.