Modules  
  This course requires you to complete the following core modules:   
  
   Introduction to Medical Microbiology (10 credits)  
  
  
   This module will highlight the properties and host range of various micro-organisms involved in infection such as bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites, and outlines the development of appropriate immune responses against these micro-organisms. This will give students the necessary foundations in medical microbiology.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Microbial and Molecular Technology (10 credits)  
  
 
   During the microbiology practicals students will gain experience in conventional techniques related to the characterisation of some important pathogens. From this they will appreciate the key features of bacterial identification and the spectrum of activity of commonly used antibiotics. The student will gain hands-on experience of a number of molecular biological techniques used in the study of microbial and molecular biological techniques. 
  
 
     
  
  
   Applied Molecular Microbiology (20 credits)   
  
 
   This module aims to give the students a thorough understanding of the theory and potential applications of modern molecular biological techniques in diagnostic and research microbiology. This will be achieved via a series of lectures to provide theoretical support of the practical module, and problem based learning (PBL) to extend student knowledge on important topics in molecular microbiology related to diagnostic medicine. 
  
 
     
  
  
   Viral Pathogenesis and Infections (20 credits)  
  
 
   This module will illustrate how viruses interact with cells, what are the underlying molecular mechanisms of infection and replication, and how these interactions lead to clinical disease. Treatment options for a number of important viral pathogens will be discussed. 
  
 
     
  
  
   Bacterial Pathogenesis and Infections (20 credits)   
  
 
   Initial lectures for this module will highlight the different mechanisms associated with disease pathogenesis for a selection of medically important bacteria. Subsequent lectures and tutorials will give students an understanding of clinical syndromes - a systematic approach, including the microbiology of important diseases of bacterial pathogens, diagnostic approaches and choice of antibiotic. 
  
 
     
  
  
   Prevention and Treatment of Infection (20 credits)   
  
 
   This module will facilitate an understanding of antimicrobial therapies for the control of infection and disease. This will encompass studies of the action of specific antimicrobial compounds, mechanisms of resistance and the development of preventative and therapeutic vaccines. 
  
 
     
  
  
   Research Methods (10 credits)  
  
 
   The module is designed to facilitate the analysis of scientific literature through a critical appraisal of two independent research papers. The module will (1) encourage a critical approach to the principles and practice of laboratory research, (2) develop core skills necessary for the analysis of scientific data, and (3) develop key presentation skills of content and appropriate timing.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Research Project (60 credits)  
  
 
   This module enables students to experience contemporary research methods by engaging them to implement a research programme and perform experiments, surveys, or other research activities aimed at solving a specific biomedical problem. Each student will be allocated an academic supervisor within the Faculty of Medicine and Healthcare Sciences whom they will discuss the research project prior to commencement. Students will first collect, analyse data, read and collate previous results relevant to their project, then embark on a period of research before preparing, writing and submitting a scientific paper. They will discuss their work with members of the research group and may be required by their research group to present a presentation of their work to the group. The form of the project may vary and it will be based on laboratory work, audit, patient studies or an extended literature review. The principal activities will be completion of the practical work and submission of a final report in the form of a scientific paper, and 
  viva voce on their project work with an external and internal examiner. 
  
 
     
  
     
  In addition, you will be able to choose from one of the following optional modules:   
  
  Scientific Review of Writing (10 credits) 
  
  
   In this optional module students will write a dissertation of approximately 4,000 words from a list of topics provided by academic staff. The primary aim of the module is the development of the students' ability to research a subject in depth, and to produce written and oral presentations.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Science, Technology and Business (10 credits)  
  
 
   This optional 10 credit module will introduce students to the importance of, and the processes involved in the commercialisation of science and technology. The content of the course is highly relevant in the current climate where Government is placing much evidence on the wealth creation process. The aims of the module are achieved by experiential learning. 
  
 
     
  
  
   Please note that all module details are subject to change.  
   We also provide some background material for students to look at prior to starting the course, to make sure that everyone is starting off from a similar level of knowledge. This material is delivered online, with quizzes that enable self-testing. The same software is used throughout the course to provide additional learning material.  
  
     
  For more details on our modules, please see the module catalogue.