Modules  
  A full list of available modules can be found in our Politics and International Relations postgraduate module guide  
  Core modules  
 
   Dissertation: Politics and International Relations (Research Track) 
  
  
   This module involves the research and writing of a substantive dissertation of 15,000 words within the field of politics.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    allow the student to write a dissertation on a subject chosen in conjunction with their supervisor, facilitating the application of the research training provided on the taught element of the course  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Design, Practice and Ethics 
  
  
   This module focuses on the analytical, practical and ethical organisation of social science research.   
   The analytical organisation is often referred to as ‘research design’ and will constitute the bulk of the content of this module. Research design consists of choices necessary to transform a research question into actual research. These choices pertain to strategies and modes of case selection, observation methods, data collection and modes of analysis.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    familiarise students with diagnosing and evaluating elements of research design in existing research  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Core modules from the School of Law  
  
   Fundamentals of Quantitative Analysis  
  
  Core modules from the School of Sociology and Social Policy  
  
   Foundations in Qualitative Methods  
   Philosophy of Research - Social Science  
  
  Plus 40 credits from either the following section, or from a list of Advanced Training modules offered by the ESRC DTC:  
 
   Designing Political Enquiry 
  
  
   The module is designed to allow students to develop a critical understanding of the methodological issues involved in designing and undertaking political science research and to strengthen their ability to read and evaluate political science literature more generally.  
   Topics to be addressed include issues involved in developing a research question, problems of conceptualisation, measurement, and strategies and approaches to causal theorising in research. The second part of the module addresses various methods of generating and processing data for political science research. Methods that are covered include the use of documentary sources, observation, and various forms of interviewing.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide students with an understanding of the stages and issues that are involved in designing research in political science and political theory  
    encourage students to apply the research design tools for the critical assessment of literature in political science  
    familiarise students with different techniques of generating and processing data, and to encourage students to critically use and assess these techniques  
    promote students' ability to develop and design their own research project  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Theories and Concepts in International Relations 
  
  
   The War on Iraq and the US and British invasion of the country in 2003 has led to huge tensions in geopolitics. At the same time, the supposed 'threat' of international terrorism and continuing financial turmoil in the world economy have both brought to the fore the global politics of co-operation and confrontation.  
   The purpose of this module is to make students aware of the diversity of approaches to international theory. Within International Relations (IR) theory there exist highly divergent interpretations and applications of key concepts (eg power, the state, agency, structure, and world order) as well as contested views about the practical purpose underpinning theories of world politics.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    familiarise students with the contemporary literature and debates  
    appreciate the strengths and weaknesses of competing approaches  
    develop an understanding of how key concepts are conceived and applied in international relations  
    develop a critical comparison of the application of the dominant explanatory models  
    understand the reasons for the use of specific approaches  
   
  
 
     
  
  Optional modules  
  Choose 20 credits from below:  
 
   Europe and the Developing World 
  
  
   This module analyses the decision-making process and current policy issues in both economic (first pillar) and political and security (CFSP: Common Foreign and Security Policies, and ESDP: European Security and Defence Policies) policies within the European Union.  
   Themes include:   
   
    theorising EU security policies  
    instruments of security policies  
    issues such as post-colonialism  
    intervention  
    ethics of intervention  
    just war theory  
    asylum policies  
    migration policies  
    the fight against terrorism and WMD (Weapons of Mass Destruction)  
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     promote a critical engagement with material in the International Relations and European Foreign Policy field  
     provide an insight into the link between theory and practice of security policies  
     provide an understanding of how the European Union reacts to international crises  
     provide a basis for further study or careers in government, international organisations, media and the military  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Justice Beyond Borders: Theories of International and Intergenerational Justice 
  
  
   The module introduces and explores the concept of distributive justice on an international and intergenerational basis. It examines how justice has traditionally been conceptualised, and challenges the idea of the nation-state as providing limits to the proper operation of principles of justice.  
   Justice between nations, and between generations, as well as between humans and non-humans, forms the focus of this module. The programme for dealing with these themes includes:   
   
    international theories of justice, with particular reference to faminie relief and humanitarian intervention  
    intergenerational justice and personal identity  
    'biocentric' theories of justice  
    animal rights  
    dire  
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     provide an understanding of the philosophical foundations to arguments about distributive justice, particularly as these apply to international and intergenerational concerns  
     build appreciation for the operation of principles of justice with respect to specific issues, such as global redistribution and intergenerational issues  
     build awareness of key conceptual and methodological issues in the study of contemporary political theory  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Theories and Concepts in International Relations 
  
  
   The War on Iraq and the US and British invasion of the country in 2003 has led to huge tensions in geopolitics. At the same time, the supposed 'threat' of international terrorism and continuing financial turmoil in the world economy have both brought to the fore the global politics of co-operation and confrontation.  
   The purpose of this module is to make students aware of the diversity of approaches to international theory. Within International Relations (IR) theory there exist highly divergent interpretations and applications of key concepts (eg power, the state, agency, structure, and world order) as well as contested views about the practical purpose underpinning theories of world politics.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    familiarise students with the contemporary literature and debates  
    appreciate the strengths and weaknesses of competing approaches  
    develop an understanding of how key concepts are conceived and applied in international relations  
    develop a critical comparison of the application of the dominant explanatory models  
    understand the reasons for the use of specific approaches  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Politics of South Asia 
  
  
   This module introduces students to the politics of modern South Asia, focusing on Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.  
   The region is growing in international importance both strategically, economically and politically. The module evaluates alternative explanations for the different democratic trajectories of these states, despite their shared colonial past, and the interaction between 'tradition' and 'modernity' in developing political institutions.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the political history of South Asia, in order that they may develop an understanding of the multiple challenges the different states faced  
    compare the political institutions of the states of South Asia, and to provide an understanding of the relationship of 'traditional' societies with 'modern' democratic institutions  
    develop a critical and comparative understanding of contemporary South Asian politics, both internally and externally  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   When does Russia expand and Why? 
  
  
   Russia’s annexation of the Crimea will strike many Westerners as merely the latest chapter in a long history of Russian imperialism. Does Russia always expand when it has the opportunity? Or is its expansion, when it occurs, explained by contingent factors?  
   This module will examine Russia’s expansion and contraction from the 17th century to the present, and the causes underlying it.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    examine patterns of Russian expansion and restraint, and theories that may help us understand them and predict the future  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  And 20 credits from below:  
 
   Contemporary Warfare 
  
  
   This module will primarily address the increased role that non-state actors play in global security. It will introduce students to empirical analyses of numerous terrorist and insurgent groups, as well as to theoretical understandings of sub-state violence in the post-9/11 world.  
   The events of 11 September 2001 and the subsequent American declaration of a ‘War on Terror’ have recast the focus of global security. The attack upon a hegemonic superpower by violent non-state actors placed terrorism at the centre of Western concepts of contemporary security and enabled President Bush to redraw international relations along the fault-line of those either ‘with us or against us’ in a global effort to eradicate terrorist threats.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    give students a broad understanding of the role non-state actors play in contemporary global security  
    build a conceptual and empirical appreciation of how states and non-state actors interact in the realm of contemporary global security  
    offer an understanding of how the influence and importance of non-state actors to the dynamics of global security has changed  
    build an understanding as to the motives behind violent sub-state behaviour before and after 9/11  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Grand Strategy 
  
  
   This module examines how nations have sought to integrate political, economic, and military goals to preserve their long-term interests. It analyses a variety of national strategies in order to understand how geography, history, culture, and finance influence decision making at the highest levels of government in times of war and peace.  
   The module draws on scholarship from the fields of international relations, diplomatic history, and strategic studies to provide students with a more nuanced understanding of great power politics.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide students with the necessary historical, strategic and theoretical background to achieving an understanding of grand strategy as a component of the study of International Politics   
    compare different grand strategies across time and space   
    develop an understanding of how governments integrate their political, economic, and military goals in order to preserve long-term interests  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Political Utopianism 
  
  
   Utopianism lies at the heart of politics, while utopias and dystopias provide the visions, aspirations and directions of future politics. They also offer criticisms of the political present and predictions for the future.  
   This module seeks to explore the concept of utopia and we will look at utopian and dystopian theory, fiction, film and social experiments.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    facilitate further study of political thought   
    explore critiques of utopianism and realism   
    engage in in-depth textual study  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Terrorism and Insurgencies 
  
  
   This module is designed to acquaint students with two of the most important aspects of contemporary international security: terrorism and insurgencies.  
   Both threats have become more acute in recent years and much intellectual, military and economic capital has been used up in efforts to contain them. In taking this module, students will begin to understand the nature of the threats posed by terrorists and insurgents. They will understand how such threats come about and why individuals are drawn towards exercising the use of force against certain governments, their representatives, and the citizens of those governments.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    build an understanding of the development of the four main waves of modern terrorism and of contemporary efforts in the realm of counter-terrorism  
    develop an awareness of the debates surrounding the changes in nature terrorism and the problematic nature of the response of the liberal state  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Theory and Practice of Diplomacy 
  
  
   This module focuses on the changing nature of diplomatic practice, together with the range of conceptual tools that seek to explain this international activity.   
   It provides a political analysis of new developments such as the public diplomacy, the decline of resident embassies and foreign ministries, and the role of regional/multinational organisations and summitry.  
   It also encourages students to consider future theoretical and practical developments in this field.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    offer an advanced study of the theory and practice of current diplomacy  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   War, Peace and Terror 
  
  
   This module explores the blurring boundaries between war and peace, and the implications for understanding security. The first section assesses the changing nature of warfare, including theories of asymmetric warfare and terrorism; the second section examines the ‘dark arts’ of international relations, from assassination to psychological warfare, operating in the grey area between war and peace.  
   With large scale conventional warfare increasingly unlikely, the third section considers ‘new’ security issues in peacetime such as poverty and disease.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    give students critical understanding of the blurring boundaries between war and peace in the modern world  
    introduce students to a range of issues, from terrorism to covert action, which are increasingly challenging conventional distinctions between war and peace  
    introduce students to theories of war, peace, and security and impart an awareness of how the ‘security’ agenda of states and societies is changing  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Western Counter-Terrorism Cooperation 
  
  
   Since the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the United States and Europe have sought to cooperate on counter-terrorism policies and this module will investigate both the substance of this cooperation as well as the conceptual thinking on which it is based.   
   It will seek to determine whether a coherent US-European approach to countering transnational terrorism is emerging and whether this approach can provide a foundation for a wider international counter-terrorism architecture.  
   Attention will be paid to multilateral approaches to combating terrorism through organisations such as the United Nations and attempts by the transatlantic allies to extend counter-terrorism cooperation to the wider international community.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    help students appreciate the complex internal and external security challenges presented by contemporary terrorism  
    engage with the literature and theories on counter-terrorism policy  
    understand that western counter-terrorism policy requires international cooperation across several policy fields  
    gain awareness of different priorities in counter-terrorism policy  
    appreciate the obstacles that confront counter-terrorism cooperation and the delicate balance in providing security whilst safeguarding civil liberties  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Please note that modules may change in order to keep abreast of political and academic developments.