Modules  
  Students who wish to apply for an ESRC PhD scholarship after completion of the MA will need to follow an ESRC strand within the course - which will mean a slight change to the structure below. Full details will be given to students on starting the course.  
  Autumn Semester  
  1) Students take the module:  
  
   Research Methods in Applied Linguistics: Quantitative and Qualitative Methods (15 credits)  
  
  
   The module looks at various approaches of collecting and processing data using both qualitative and quantitative methods of investigation. With a focus on the area of applied linguistics, students will be introduced to the process of hypothesis formulation and testing, issues of interpretation, evaluation and replicability of data and of research results, questionnaire and interview design, data gathering and recording, statistical description and analysis.  
  
 
     
  
  2) Students then choose between 15 and 45 credits from the following list:  
  
   Psychology of Language (15 credits)  
  
  
   This module considers three fundamental and interrelated questions about psycholinguistics: 1. acquisition, or how language is acquired; 2. comprehension, or how words, sentences, and discourse are understood; and 3. production, or how words, sentences, and conversations are produced. Potential topics include, but are not limited to: lexical influences on sentence comprehension and production; first and second language acquisition; reading; language disorders (e.g., dyslexia, aphasia).  
  
 
     
  
  
   Grammar in the Classroom (15 credits)  
  
  
   This module examines the role of grammar in language teaching. In order to do this the module has three separate foci: grammar as a part of language study, how grammar can be taught and grammar as part of language acquisition. Each of these areas is considered in turn. We reflect on recent developments in systemic functional grammar, corpus linguistics and cognitive linguistics and how these have influenced how we think about grammar. We examine the role grammar plays in different levels of teaching practice, from syllabus to methodology to materials. We also look at what SLA research tells us about learners’ abilities to acquire L2 structures.   
  
 
     
  
  
   Intercultural Communication (15 credits)  
  
  
   This module will explore the use of language in interactions between speakers of different cultural and linguistic backgrounds from three different perspectives: Description, Development, and Assessment. With a growing proportion of interactions in the world today taking place between people of diverse cultural backgrounds, it is important to identify and describe language use which may lead to misunderstanding and communicative breakdown. This module will look at ways in which language barriers might be overcome in such interactions, and at the key factors in this process. We will examine intercultural interactions in a variety of contexts, e.g. business and other professional encounters, the language of the media, the language classroom, etc.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Language Teaching: Speaking and Listening (15 credits)  
  
  
   The main focus of this module is an exploration of teaching methods for listening and speaking in EFL and ESL environments. The components of the module will provide a theoretical and practical focus for the content and organisation of language classes focused on listening and speaking. Students will become familiar with the four strands approach to designing language learning programs. Within this context, participants will be guided towards good practice in English language teaching and learning constructed from current theory, methods, approaches and practices. Students will have the opportunity to observe, plan, prepare and teach listening and speaking activities
      
  
 
     
  
  3) If students choose only 15 credits from the list above, then they may choose to take 30 credits from the following:  
  
   Research in Literary Linguistics (15 credits)  
  
  
   This module explores the use of linguistic frameworks to investigate literary texts. Through a series of practical analyses, students will be introduced to a range of linguistic explorations of poetry, prose, and drama from a wide range of historical periods. The course will invite students to use the analyses as an occasion for the critical evaluation of the various approaches to language and literature, to investigate the notions of literariness and interpretation, and to consider the scope and validity of stylistics in relation to literature and literary studies. The range of key research methods and methodologies in stylistics will be studied
     
  
 
     
  
  
   Business & Organisational Communication (15 credits)   
  
  
   The module investigates the multidisciplinary subject of business and organisational communication. It covers a wide range of quantitative and qualitative approaches, examining how individuals and groups use spoken and written communication to get work achieved successfully. The range of methodologies and analytical frameworks for interrogating business and organisational communication include: conversation analysis, corpus linguistics, critical discourse analysis, pragmatics and speech act theory, ethnography and genre analysis. The module also highlights contemporary issues emerging from the field, exploring, for instance, the influence of context, new multi-media technologies and globalisation on communication in commercial domains and organisational environments. The module emphasises how the findings of communicative research can be practically applied in teaching and training materials and in consultancy work.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Consciousness in Fiction (15 credits)  
  
  
   The module will explore in depth techniques for the presentation of consciousness in novels and other fictional texts. Students will learn about the linguistic indices associated with the point of view of characters and the various modes available to a writer for the presentation of characters’ thoughts and perceptions. Alongside detailed examinations of narrative texts which portray consciousness, students will also study different theories put forward to explain the nature of writing consciousness in texts. Our stylistic analyses of fictional minds will also aim to account for historical changes in the techniques used for consciousness presentation.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Dickens & Language (15 credits)  
  
  
   Through detailed study of a selection of his novels, this module will examine the language and style of Dickens. It investigates the creation of fictional worlds and techniques of characterization. While the focus is on Dickens, the module introduces stylistic approaches that are of wider applicability (such as approaches to body language in literature or computer-assisted methods of analysis). The module also deals with the reception of Dickens’s novels and assesses Dickens’s literary celebrity in the context of popular culture.  
  
 
     
  
  Spring Semester  
  1) Students take the module:  
  
   Second Language Acquisition (15 credits)  
  
  
   Arguably the most important subdiscipline for the understanding of language teaching is SLA; therefore, this module will focus on this area to ensure that students have a sound understanding of how language is learned.  
  
 
     
  
  2) Students choose between 30 and 45 credits from the following list:  
  
   Research Methods: Corpus Linguistics (15 credits)  
  
  
   Corpus linguistics provides methods for the study of collections of electronic texts (written texts, including literary texts, material from the internet, transcripts of spoken language, etc.). This module introduces fundamental corpus methods that include retrieving and interpreting word frequency information, studying patterns of words in the form of concordances, and analysing key words and key semantic domains. The module will explain basic concepts and illustrate methods through case studies. Through hands-on sessions students will actively practice the use of corpus software. Throughout the module, students are encouraged to reflect on the applicability of a range of methods to their own areas of interest (e.g. literary linguistics, discourse analysis, ELT, etc.). For the assessment, students will complete a small-scale corpus project on a topic of their own choosing (in consultation with the tutor). This project can function to test ideas that might be further developed in the dissertation.  
  
 
     
  
  
   English Vocabulary: Teaching & Learning (15 credits)  
  
  
   This module covers the various aspects of knowledge that are required to fluently use a word: meaning, written form, spoken form, grammatical properties, frequency, register, collocation, and association. Practical aspects of teaching vocabulary will also be covered, including vocabulary teaching activities, vocabulary learning strategies, vocabulary testing and the use of corpora.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Group Dynamics and Motivation in the Language Classroom (15 credits)  
  
  
   This module offers an introduction to the main psychological factors and processes that determine the way students learn foreign languages within an institutional (classroom) context. The focus will be on two key issues that have a considerable practical significance: (a) language learning motivation and (b) the internal dynamics of the learner group that can either enhance or hinder the individual members' learning achievement. Key topics to be discussed will include the components of L2 motivation; strategies to increase student motivation; structural and developmental characteristics of the 'good' learner group; group building techniques; effective leadership roles; cooperative language learning.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Assessment in the Language Classroom (15 credits)   
  
  
   The main focus of this module is an exploration of the principles of assessing second language learning. The components of the module will provide theoretical and practical knowledge of assessment techniques that allow for comprehensive treatment of all four skills in the language classroom. The course is premised on the belief that assessment has various purposes and that it is important to design and use classroom assessment methods to serve the intended purposes. Students will become familiar with assessment techniques ranging from controlled to open-ended item types as well as standardized tests and their design, purpose, validity and utility. Students will be given the opportunity to work with numerous assessment methods and consider their implementation in the language classroom. There also will be time devoted to guidelines and practical suggestions for assigning grades.  
  
 
     
  
  2) Then, students may take up to 15 credits from the following (to bring their total number of taught credits to 120):  
  
   Language and Gender (15 credits)  
  
  
   The course will explore the relationship between language and gender in spoken interaction and written texts, drawing on key approaches in the areas of discourse analysis, sociolinguistics and pragmatics. The extent to which gender affects the language we produce when interacting with one another in a variety of contexts will be focused on, along with the issue of sexism in language use. Various theoretical paradigms that have been presented to explain language and gender differences will be critically examined, along with gender ideologies which operate in society. Students will be encouraged to combine theoretical thinking with hands-on analyses of data from authentic examples of spoken interaction and from a variety of publications including the popular media. The practical consequences of the discipline in terms of how findings can have a political impact on wider society are also discussed.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Sociolinguistics of Work (15 credits)  
  
  
   This module is intended to familiarise students with theories and applications of sociolinguistics in relation to the context of work. It will cover a range of sociolinguistic, workplace topics, including a focus upon the following: workplace cultures; language and identity, including gender, ethnicity, age, religion/nation and social class; miscommunication; intercultural communication; linguistic politeness and interactional sociolinguistics. The module will emphasise the crucial relationship between social variables, power and communication in the workplace, and demonstrate how recourse to sociolinguistic analysis can illuminate and enhance communication in a range of workplaces.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Cognition & Literature (15 credits)  
  
  
   This module represents a course in cognitive poetics. It draws on insights developed in cognitive science, especially in psychology and linguistics, in order to develop an understanding of the processes involved in literary reading. The module also develops skills in stylistics and critical theory.  
  
 
     
  
  Summer  
  The final element of the course is a 60 credit dissertation, which students complete over the Summer period.  
  More information on the above modules is available in the Module Catalogue.  
  Please note that all modules are subject to change.  
  Further information about the ESRC scholarship is available on the School page.  
  Back to top