Modules  
  Core modules       
 
   Critical Perspectives on Social Work 
  
  
   The module critically examines some of the main social theories which conceptualise the nature of social work and its relationship to the state, society and the individual.  
   Students will be enabled to understand how different theoretical approaches provide different ways of thinking about the nature of social work and their implications for social work practice.   
   The theories and debates covered will include:  
   
    the nature of best practice  
    anti-oppressive practice, power and authority  
    the role of research in social work and evidence-based practice  
    service user perspectives  
    the contribution of sociological theories regarding personal life, risk, movement, and everyday objects  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide a critical understanding how different theoretical perspectives seek to explain and define what social work is  
    build an understanding about being a humane, generous practitioner and ethical uses of power and authority  
    examine competing theoretical and ideological perspectives on the self, the individual and social action  
    enable students to further develop their critical understanding of theory and practice and of strategies aimed at promoting relationship-based practice and social justice  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Dissertation 
  
  
  
    The module encourages students to critically engage with fundamental questions at the heart of social science research and their impact on social work practice.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This module: 
   
   
   
    
     points to the importance of 'evidenced-based' research for the social work profession  
     develops a critical understanding of the range of research informing social work practice, including practitioner research  
     stresses why social work practice needs to be grounded in social research which is critical of 'official' accounts of social welfare  
     aids student participants in the 'process' of formulating research plans  
     introduces student participants to the electronic resources which are available at the Hallward Library  
     focuses on the research methods, particularly qualitative methods, which will be central to the writing of the dissertation  
     explores issues related to the ethics of social research  
     highlights how the presentation of research findings is a major component of research activity  
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     
      ensure that students understand key aspects of qualitative research methods, use of information technology and literature survey methods  
      allow students to engage in self-directed learning and management of their own research activities, in order to produce a dissertation against agreed timescales  
     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Human Growth and Development across the Life Course 
  
  
   The module provides students with an introduction to a range of theories and evidence about human growth and development. Students will be enabled to understand the ways in which human growth and development is affected by a range of factors across the life course and how these factors may impact on the development of resilience and well-being.  
   They are encouraged to develop a critical awareness of the various theoretical perspectives alongside an ability to apply this knowledge to social work practice.   
   The module follows a life course perspective, tracking human growth and development from the cradle to the grave and draws on theoretical material from a range of different disciplines.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide an overview of human development through the life course, exploring how this is influenced by a wide range of determinants  
    offer an introduction to some of the major theoretical perspectives around human growth and development  
    consider challenges to human development across the life course and their implications for the development of resilience and well being  
    consider the application of these theories in social work practice  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Law for Social Work 
  
  
   This module prepares students with an introduction to relevant legislation, policies and guidance for social work practice with a variety of service users.  
   The programme recognises the centrality of the law and its interaction with policy and research in promoting and safeguarding the welfare of children and adults, and the necessity for practitioners to be confident when representing agencies and working with service users in legislative contexts.   
   To enable a better understanding and application of law to practice, the module includes a general consideration of the English legal system and considers areas around the court structure, civil vs. criminal procedures; differing burdens of proof; duties vs. powers; delegated legislation and so on. It focuses on specific legislative frameworks for working with children, including youth justice, older people and people with mental health problems.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    affirm the centrality of social work practice within a legal context  
    build legal knowledge and skills, particularly around court work, to help recognise the relationship between the law and social workers' accountability  
    identify and evaluate the ethical principles informing good practice under the law  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Methods and Research Management 
  
  
   This module provides a general introduction to a range of key issues in the design and conduct of social research, plus guidance on writing both a dissertation proposal and a dissertation.   
   The module combines more formal taught sessions with practical exercises, some of which are group based.  
   By the end of the module students will be equipped with the methodological and practical skills to carry out independent research using a variety of research designs and methods.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    explore some of the major issues (epistemological, practical and ethical) involved with undertaking social research  
    develop an appreciation of the factors to be considered in designing a piece of research  
    examine the pros and cons of key research methods used in social research  
    enhance skills in devising and managing pieces of research  
    outline the major issues associated with undertaking postgraduate dissertation research in the social sciences  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Safeguarding 
  
  
   This module will introduce students to key theoretical, legal and practice aspects of safeguarding children and vulnerable adults.  
   It will require students to engage in learning from previous situations in which social work intervention has failed to protect children or vulnerable adults from abuse. Please note that both undergraduate and postgraduate social work students will be attending this module.   
   For undergraduate students the overall pass mark for the module is 40% and all module elements are non-compensatable (i.e. you must pass each assessment at 40%) For postgraduate students the overall pass mark for the module is 50% but compensation between module elements is allowed for marks of 40% and above (i.e. if you have an average over 50% you can compensate for assessments if the mark was 40% or higher).  
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to existing child protection and adult safeguarding systems, including an awareness of the contexts in which these services have developed  
    enable students to understand the different approaches indicated by the terms ‘protection’ and ‘safeguarding’   
    introduce students to concepts of risk assessment and risk management   
    enable students to acquire some knowledge of current law, policy and practice in relation to both child protection and adult safeguarding – including the importance of learning from past cases   
    deepen students’ awareness of how issues of power and discrimination are relevant to this aspect of social work practice   
    challenge students to consider how their personal and professional experiences may impact on their interpretation of service user’ lives  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Service User Perspectives 
  
  
   This module will introduce students to the unequal power relationships to which service users are subject. It will briefly consider some of the theoretical approaches to understanding how these dynamics emerge and are perpetuated.  
   Students will then receive teaching delivered by a range of different service user group, each of which will provide perspectives on their lived experiences. Students will be required to present and reflect on a chosen aspect of their own life experience.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    make students aware of the power dynamics which exist between service users and social workers, from the perspective of the service users   
    provide an opportunity to hear, from service users themselves, how social work interventions are experienced by different service user groups  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Social Work Theories, Models and Methods 
  
  
   This module prepares students for social work practice. It concentrates on the skills necessary to engage with service users and offers an overview of the social work process of assessment, planning, intervention and evaluation (APIE).  
   This provides students with a basic theoretical framework for social work practice in which the nature of social work theory is examined in relation to assessment, planning, intervention and evaluation. The module also considers the influence of values on social work practice.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    prepare students for practice situations through the development, enhancement and rehearsal of social work skills, such as communication, observation and reflection  
   
  
 
     
  
  Optional modules    
 
   Social Welfare with Children and Families 
  
  
  
    This module is designed for those students who have an interest in exploring social welfare with children and families, and wish to extend their knowledge of this area in relation to social policy and social work. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
     
      introduce students to a range of perspectives relevant to understanding child maltreatment and its effects, and to delivering the services required by children and young people in need and their parents  
      enable students to acquire a knowledge of the policy and social care practices involved in delivering social welfare to children and young people in need and their families  
     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Social Work with Adults 
  
  
   This module acts as the bridge between academic learning and professional qualifying practice. It provides students with an insight into topical issues for practice through a series of workshops led by expert practitioners and /or academic staff.  
   Issues based teaching sessions will be run that enable and expect students to make the links between the learning and their own professional development. Please note that both undergraduate and postgraduate social work students will be attending this module.   
   For postgraduate students the overall pass mark for the module is 50%, but compensation between module elements is allowed for marks of 40% and above (i.e. if you have an average over 50% you can compensate for assessments if the mark was 40% or higher).  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop in students a framework for reflective learning that they continue to use in practice   
    introduce students to topical themes in contemporary practice and policy with children and families   
    provide students with an understanding of the lived experiences of those needing and using social work services   
    support students to begin to develop an understanding of their professional development and current and future learning needs  
    provide opportunities for students to connect academic learning with practice  
    provide students with the opportunity to reflect on the values and ethical frameworks for effective social work practice  
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  
  
   Please note that all module details are subject to change.