Modules  
    
  MSc students undertake all modules to gain 180 credits.  
  PGDip students undertake all modules, but not the Project and Dissertation module to gain 120 credits.  
     
  
   Module A34614 - Sports Injuries - Anatomy and assessment(30 credits)  
  
  
   The overall aim of this module is to integrate the knowledge, skills and techniques required for the effective assessment and management of sports injuries. An integrated approach to functional anatomy and the application of specific assessment/examination procedures is adopted. This module strips back to the basics of underlying structural and surface anatomy and relating it to clinical presentation ensuring students have the foundations on which to build their clinical assessment of common sporting injuries.  
   Further information about this module.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Module A34628 - Clinical Sports Injuries (10 credits)  
  
  
   The overall aim of this module is to integrate the knowledge of common sporting injuries and approaches to management of regional and sport-specific injuries using research based evidence and current daily practice. The teaching is provided by many different lecturers, who are experts in their fields of sport and exercise medicine, thus providing you with up-to-date and knowledgeable tuition from key specialists.  
   Further information about this module.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Modules B14001 - Nutrition in Health and Exercise (20 credits) and B14005 - Muscle Physiology and Metabolism (20 credits)  
  
  
   Nutrition in Health and Exercise (B14001)  
   This module aims to provide students with the opportunity to develop an understanding of:  
   
    the principles of nutrition;  
    the essential nutrients, their metabolism and the energy requirements of exercise;   
    the influence that dietary manipulation/management has on (a) resting metabolism and (b) exercise metabolism and performance;   
    nutrient-gene interactions in healthy humans.  
   
   Further information about this module.  
   Muscle Physiology and Metabolism (B14005)  
   This module is designed to enable students to develop a strong understanding of the central roles that muscle metabolism and muscle mass play in deciding muscle functional outcomes in health and disease. A series of lectures, together with directed study, will lead students to focus a series of seminars on physiological integration and disease.  
   Further information about this module.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Module A34629 - Immediate and Pre-hospital Care of the Injured Athlete (10 credits)  
  
  
   This module includes the material required for the acquisition of a RCSEd Faculty of Pre-hospital Care approved level two “Emergency Medical Management in Individual and Team Sports (EMMiITS)” certificate, valid for three years. The module also provides an insight into specific issues associated with a range of sports.  
   Emergency Medical Management in Individual and Team Sports (EMMiITS)  
   This highly practical and intensive two day advanced emergency care on the field of play course will enable doctors, physiotherapists and other allied medical professionals who already hold a basic first aid certificate to improve upon their current basic skills under the guidance of a highly experienced and knowledgeable faculty of sports medicine practitioners, emergency care and basics doctors, physiotherapists, nurse practitioners and paramedics.   Advanced discussions will occur on duty of care in sport, emergency airway management, extrication from the field of play, automated external defibrillation and BLS plus sports specific moulages focusing on common sporting traumas.  Candidates are required to attend the two day course in full and complete all three assessments in order to pass and be awarded a certificate for EMMiITS.  
   Sport placements  
   Students will be placed at selected University sports grounds to provide first aid cover at events. Placement with professional sport teams will also be arranged for students.  
   Further information about this module.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Module A34616 - Physical Activity in Health and Disease (30 credits)  
  
  
   This module will cover the current public health issues relating to exercise and health; the relationship between exercise and specific medical conditions; exercise under specific conditions and the practical aspects of the medical management in sport.  
   Further information about this module.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Module A34631 - Project and Dissertation (60 credits)  
  
  
   This module aims to provide the skills needed for designing, undertaking and analysing data from the research project.  It will involve the student undertaking a research project on a topic relevant to Sports and Exercise Medicine. Suitable project topics will be proposed by members of the MSc teaching staff. Students are also free to make their own suggestions for projects, which may or may not be deemed acceptable. (Student dissertations in previous years) A project supervisor will be appointed for each project. This allocation is made at the start of the academic year and the student is then expected to work on the project throughout the year.  This module also covers the main research methods relevant to the students’ research projects, the strengths and weaknesses of different types of study design, the key principles of research ethics, critical appraisal, and statistics, and how to undertake statistical analyses relevant to their research projects. This will be taught using a combination of tutorials, e-learning, formative assessments and computer practicals.  
   Further information about this module.