Modules  
  
   
  
    Research Methods and Resources 
   
   
   
     You will be introduced to the necessary skills and resources for postgraduate research alongside methodological and theoretical issues in theology and church history. Topics studied may include IT skills, library resources, the development of arguments, formatting and referencing and the relationship between academic research and religious commitment. You will be assessed through a 4000-word essay and a 1000-word account of the research undertaken.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Systematic and Theological Philosophy for Newcomers 
   
  
    This module is particularly aimed at students who are entering the discipline from outside theology/philosophy. You will be introduced to the language and method of systematic and philosophical theology through the study of key themes and texts. These may include portions of Plato’s 
   Republic, Aristotle’s 
   Metaphysics, St. Thomas Aquinas on theological language, and John Calvin on the sacrament of the Eucharist, amongst others. The teaching will be delivered through a variety of ways including printed materials, online discussions with tutors and students, recorded interviews and lectures at the annual Spring seminar. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Christology 
   
  
    This module concerns the development of Christology from the apostolic age to the present. Through the close reading of a number of thinkers, such as Cyril of Alexandria, Maximus the Confessor, Anselm of Canterbury and Sergei Bulgakov, you will examine key issues such as the doctrines of the hyperstatic union, the nature of what is ‘revealed’ in Christ, and theories of ‘soteriology’ (how the work of Christ ‘saves’). 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Aquinas and Thomisms 
   
  
    This module aims to develop your understanding of the thought of St. Thomas Aquinas (c.1225-1274) and its reception. You will examine key themes such as the relationship between philosophy and theology, the doctrine of creation, and Christology and the sacraments. You will go on to study significant interpretations in Thomist thought, from Suarez (1548-1617) to the present day. The module is delivered through a variety of ways including printed materials, online discussions with tutors and students, recorded interviews and lectures at the annual spring seminar.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    La Nouvelle Th&eacute;ologie 
   
  
    You will be introduced to the thought, thinkers and origins of a movement in twentieth century Catholic theology known as ‘La Nouvelle Th&eacute;ologie’. Through the study of thinkers such as Henri de Lubac, Yves Congar and Marie-Dominique Chenu, you will focus on the revival of the tradition, theology’s position in late modernity, and the very recent indication of a renewal of Neo-Scholastic priorities, particularly in the US. The module aims to further your understanding of current debates, with reference to the confrontation between la nouvelle th&eacute;ologie and Neo-Scholasticism, as well as of the current Papacy and wider ecclesiastical relations.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Early Christian Writings: Outside the Canonical Collection 
   
  
    You will be introduced to four or six (according the number of credits permitted) documents from early followers of Jesus in their entirety, with a focus on the growing distinctions during the period between Judaism and Christianity. This will lead to an examination of how these documents present the history of various early communities and their theological concerns, and how they can be used in theological understanding today. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Developing Tradition: Theologians of the Second Century 
   
  
    You will study four or six (according to the number of credits permitted) second-century Christian documents in their entirety, with a focus on their concerns. You will be provided with advanced training in the academic disciplines of patristics and historical theology, and be introduced to the development of Christian doctrine. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Emergence of the New Testament Canon 
   
  
    You will examine the factors in early Christianity which led to certain documents being accorded special status in the worship, memory and theology of the Christian community. You will also explore the emergence of a Christian canon of theology, and its significance for Christianity as another ‘lawful religion’ within the Roman Empire. Teaching will be delivered through a variety of ways including printed materials, online discussions with tutors and students, recorded interviews and lectures at the annual spring seminar. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Reading Medieval Theologians from Anselm to Ockham 
   
   
    
    This module offers a thorough introduction to a critical period in the development of the western church through the study of primary texts, in translation, from Anselm (c.1033 – 1109) to William of Ockham (c. 1285 – 1347). You will learn how theology was changed by the rise of the university, the recovery of Aristotle and the reception of Islamic thought, and Anselm’s theological method through documents ranging in genre from the formal academic to the liturgical. Alongside this, you will consider some of the characteristics of ‘scholasticism’.  
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Virgin Mary in Christian Tradition 
   
  
    You will develop key skills in historical and systematic theology with reference to Christian doctrine and devotion concerning the Virgin Mary. You will study the development of the Marian cult in Western and Eastern traditions with emphasis on its spiritual, doctrinal and liturgical importance. The module will show how interest in the Virgin Mary increased in the first five centuries of the Church, before moving on to the scholastic philosophers’ interest in her relationship to God and the human race during the medieval period, and, finally, the differing perceptions of Mary in the modern era. The module will focus on the reading of primary sources, dating from the first to the twenty-first centuries, and assessing their importance within the Marian tradition as a whole. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Richard Hooker: Prophet of Anglicanism? 
   
  
    This module considers how the thought of Richard Hooker (1554-1600) has helped shape the development of the Church of England’s self-understanding over the centuries, with particular attention paid to Hooker’s writings and their interpretations. Alongside examination of Hooker and his world, you will consider the themes of reason, scripture, and justification by faith alone. The module will conclude by offering a study of the ways in which Hooker’s work speaks to modern theology. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Directed Reading 
   
   
   
     This module aims to provide groundwork for later research for students intending to continue their studies to MPhil/ Ph.D. level. You will, in conjunction with a supervisor, pursue a plan of guided reading distinct both from the area of your dissertation and, usually, topics covered on other modules. The module will enable you to develop several key skills, including, amongst others: library resource skills, the compilation of bibliographies, the planning of independent study with long-term goals in mind, critical self-awareness, and the communication and development of sophisticated argument.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Faith and Reason 
   
   
   
     This module aims to consolidate your understanding of some of the key themes in Systematic and Philosophical Theology, including the blending of faith and reason in patristic and high medieval philosophy, the separation of faith and reason in modernity, the nature of theology in relation to other disciplines, and the varieties of reason in contemporary theological, philosophical and cultural debates. You will develop knowledge of the latest research, particularly through an exposure to the research conducted by members of the department, in order to enhance your critical and analytical skills ahead of your research dissertation. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  
 
   For more details on our modules, please see the 
  Module Catalogue.