Modules  
  There are 180 credits in the MSc by Research. All masters students take the same pathway of core modules:  
  ‘Special Topic in Archaeology’ (autumn: 30 credits)  
  ‘Special Topic in Archaeology’ (spring: 30 credits)  
  OR  
  ‘Special Topic in Archaeology (either semester, 30 credits)  
  ‘Precise Topic in Archaeology (either semester, 15 credits)  
  ‘Professional Development’ (either semester, 15-30 credits)  
  The ‘Special Topic’ and ‘Precise Topic’ modules enable you to gain advanced knowledge and understanding of specific areas of archaeological science, both Bioarchaeology and Archaeological Materials, and other areas of archaeology by period or theme. You will select a special topic from the range on offer in the department each year, or by following a course of guided reading and study under the supervision of a member of staff.  
  Topics will be taught individually or in small groups through seminars, tutorials and laboratory sessions, assessed through a combination of written essays and assignments, or practical lab tests and reports, as appropriate to the subject. Some of our current topics are shown below, but special topics can often be created to suit students’ individual needs and interests – please feel free to contact the department before making your application to discuss your specific requirements.  
  ‘Research Project’ (full year: 120 credits)  
  The culmination of the research project module is a 25,000-word thesis (120 credits). The module also includes a series of compulsory ‘Research skills’ sessions that run throughout the year.  
  The core course, which is taught through a series of group workshops in the Autumn and Spring semesters, provides students with essential discipline-specific and key transferable skills including research design, project management and planning, data collection and analysis, written, oral and visual communication of research, and key IT skills. It is assessed by means of a ‘Research Portfolio’ which you build up through the year, as preparation for your independent research project. The course culminates in our annual Next Generation Archaeology conference, which our staff and students organise together, where you will present your research to a wide audience.  
  The 25,000-word thesis will be on an archaeological topic of your choice, where you will undertake advanced research using primary scientific analysis of environmental or material archaeological evidence, and critical appreciation of the wider scholarship in your field. You will be provided with guidance and supervision from one or more members of staff, and your thesis will also be assessed by an independent external examiner.  
  Current available topics  
 
   Practical Archaeobotany 
  
 
   Many current debates in archaeology, ranging from the origins of agriculture and social complexity to the rise of urban centres, rely on ideas concerning the production and consumption of plants. This "special topic" module introduces the theory and method necessary to undertake archaeobotanical research. Core topics include the identification of crops and wild plant remains, issues of preservation and recovery, analytical approaches to the interpretation of archaeobotanical data and the preservation of archaeobotanical results. The module has a strong practical component, covering the major stages of archeobotanical investigation, from on-site recovery to sample sorting, identification, quantification and data analysis. Principles underlying analytical techniques and broader interpretation are the focus of the seminars. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Practical Zooarchaeology  
  
 
   Animal remains are one of the most common finds on archaeological sites and their analysis can provide a wealth of information about what people ate in the past but also about human systems of trade, economics, social structure and even ideology. This "special topic" module introduces the aims and methods necessary to undertake zooarchaeological research. Major topics include the identification of vertebrate (mammal, bird and fish) remains, techniques of ageing and sexing, issues of bone modification, preservation and recovery, analytical techniques for reconstructing animal-human relationships, and requirements for reporting on zooarchaeological material. These skills will be put into practice as you work together to assess a zooarchaeological assemblage. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Reconstructing Ancient Technologies 
  
 
   This "special topic" consists of a number of case studies of production at various times in the past and in different geographical locations. It will also examine wider theoretical issues, including the ritual, ethnographic, experimental, social, historical and economic dimensions associated with the processes involved in transforming a range of different materials into artefacts. Videos and slides provide a richly illustrated background to lectures and discussions. Associated tutorials provide an in-depth consideration of this cross-disciplinary module. The topic will be presented as eight 2-hour slots, some of which will be practical sessions. In each case the archaeological background to the production of a material - glasses, metals, lithics or ceramics - will be described. The production of each of these materials will be viewed as one of a range of activities, so that it will be possible to assess the importance of the production activity and the products to the ancient society as a whole. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Animals: The Bones of Society 
  
 
   In archaeology the analysis of remains is often considered to be a niche specialism, providing little information beyond 'what people ate'. This "special topic" aims to demonstrate that by studying the multifarious interrelationships between humans and animals it is possible to obtain a much more nuanced appreciation of past societies. Human-animal relationships in their multifarious forms are fundamental to all societies - they shape diets, economies, landscapes and beliefs - but they also reflect cultural ideologies. The study of human-animal interactions can, therefore, provide detailed insights into the structure and worldviews of past societies. By integrating evidence from zooarchaeology, archaeology, cultural geography, social anthropology, history and iconography, this module sets out to provide new insights into mainstream archaeological questions. During the course we will investigate a wide range of issues including (but not limited to) hunting, pet-keeping, animal-based rituals, the creation and meaning of ancient landscapes, meat taboos and preferences, and expressions of identity   (e.g. social status, ethnicity and gender). These theoretical skills will be put into practice as you work together to record, analyse, interpret and report upon a zoolarchaeological assemblage. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Analysis and Interpretation of Archaeological Ceramics 
  
 
   This "special topic" is designed to introduce students from humanities and science backgrounds to the archaeological, ethnographic, and scientific study of ceramics. Students will learn about raw material procurement and manipulation, forming and decorative techniques, firing processes, evidence for pottery use, trade and exchange. The topic will also focus on the scientific methods used for studying the provenance and technology of pottery, including thin-section petrography, bulk chemical analysis (e.g. NAA and ICP), electron microscopy (e.g. SEM and EPMA) and isotopic analysis. Contact hours will be split between practical laboratory classes and seminars. The practical classes will allow students to develop skills in handling, recording and interpreting ceramic materials as well as learning analytical techniques used for the study of ceramics. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Human Evolution 
  
 
   This weekly seminar-based course will explore specific aspects of human evolution through discussion and critical evaluation of current literature. You will focus on the earlier African hominins, particularly Australopithecus and early Homo, examining themes such as diet, habitat preference and locomotion.
   
   
  
 
     
  
  New: masters-level professional development modules for arts and humanities students