Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Researching the Ancient World  
  
  
   You will cover the study of different approaches to and different types of evidence available from the ancient Greek and Roman worlds. You will be trained in research techniques and methodologies focussing on topics of controversy or current investigation in academia. You will have the opportunity to focus on topics relevant to your own interests. The module consists of a two-hour workshop each week, and students are expected to attend the department's weekly research seminar.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Myth, Society and Religion  
  
 
   You will explore the nature and role of myth in Greek and Roman cultures, with a focus on their religious and social significance. As well as examining sources in detail, you will explore different approaches to examining myth, and be given the opportunity to focus on literary, visual or historical aspects of myth. The module consists of a two-hour seminar each week. 
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Telling Stories  
  
 
   This interdisciplinary module explores the ways in which stories shape thought. You will look at historical, literary, and visual narratives alongside constructions of history, society and culture from the Greek and Roman world, as well as the modern. The programme is delivered around student interests, but topics may include emperors and excess, rhetoric and 
  narratio, the ancient novel, and the politics of immorality. You will have a two-hour seminar each week.
   
  
 
     
  
  
   War and Its Representation  
  
 
   This module focuses on textual and visual representations of war. Taught jointly by experts in art, literature and ancient history, you will explore the meanings and agendas of representations which may range from accounts of warfare in the age of Homer to images of Roman Victoria on Constantinian coinage. Topics may include war as spectacle, defeat and death, wounds and bodies, going naval and handbooks of war. You will have a weekly two-hour seminar.
   
  
 
     
  
  
   The Ancient City  
  
 
   This module explores the history, literature and visual culture of the Greek and Roman city. With a focus on Athens, Sparta and Rome, you will also have the opportunity to study earlier examples of urbanism in the Mediterranean basin, as well as contemporary settlements. You will touch upon a range of urban-related topics such as politics, religion, social status, trade, architecture, art and literary culture, from which you will be able to launch your own research. The module consists of a weekly two-hour seminar.
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Beginners' Latin for MA Students  
  
 
   You will be introduced to the grammar and vocabulary of classical Latin. No previous knowledge is assumed, and there is an emphasis on the understanding and analysis of basic sentences and short passages. You will have four 1-hour classes weekly.
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Intermediate Latin for MA Students  
  
  
  
    This module aims to complete your basic instruction in Latin, enabling you to proceed to the reading of Latin texts. The module consists of four hours of seminars weekly. 
    
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Advanced Latin for MA Students  
  
 
   Paying special attention to style and language, you will examine a range of texts representative of an author, theme or genre in the original Latin. The position of the text(s) in the development of the genre will be explored alongside consideration of its social context. You will have two hours of lectures and a one-hour seminar each week.
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Beginners' Greek for MA Students  
  
 
   You will be introduced to the basics of classical Greek vocabulary and grammar. No previous knowledge is assumed, and there is an emphasis on the ability to read classical Greek through the study and translation of adapted passages from Greek texts. You will have four 1-hour classes each week.
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Intermediate Greek for MA Students  
  
 
   This module aims to complete your basic instruction in Greek, and focuses on the reading and understanding of simple Greek texts. You will have four hours of seminars weekly.
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Advanced Greek for MA Students  
  
 
   Paying special attention to style and language, you will examine a range of texts representative of an author, theme or genre in the original Greek. The position of the text(s) in the development of the genre will be explored alongside consideration of its social context. You will have three hours of classes each week.
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Dissertation in Classical Antiquity  
  
 
   You will produce a 10,000 – 15,000 word dissertation representing the results of a research project, agreed in consultation with the module convenor and your Course Director. 
   
  
 
     
  
     
  New: masters-level professional development modules for arts and humanities students  
  For more details on our modules, please see the module catalogue.