Modules  
  Certificate, Diploma, MSc Modules   
  
   The Management of Workplace Health (three-day workshop)  
  
  
   Module Convenor: Professor Amanda Griffiths  
   Introduces a biopsychosocial model of workplace health that reflects the interface between legislation, the evidence base and professional practice. A prestigious line-up of nationally-recognised figures introduce developing health issues in the contemporary and changing workplace. This kick-off module is delivered as a workshop at the University's award-winning Jubilee Campus, enabling participants to meet the course teaching team, and each other, as well as providing ample opportunities for discussion.  
   "It is everything I have been looking for. I am not at all disappointed. I have not studied for almost 8 yrs and it has taken me a little bit of getting used to getting into it. I have got the resources I need and help is at hand whenever I need it."  
  
 
     
  
  
   Stress, Organisations and Culture (elearning)  
  
  
   Module Convenor: Dr Jonathan Houdmont  
   This module addresses the nature of contemporary psychological, social and organisational factors as they relate to individual and organisational health. It is suggested that many of the effects of these contemporary challenges are mediated by the experience of stress, a major theme of the module. The module concludes by introducing approaches to the management of the challenge presented to workplace health by work-related stress.  
   "I liked the subject matter, it gave me opportunity to learn more about a subject that is increasingly part of my working life. I liked the variety of learning materials from videos and lectures to reading of books and journals."  
  
 
     
  
  
   (Optional) Health Legislation, Guidance and Standards for Managing Stress (elearning)  
  
  
   Module Convenor: Dr Jonathan Houdmont  
   In recognition of the important interplay between legislation, scientific knowledge, and workplace health practice, this module has its focus on the legislative, policy, and guidance frameworks that surround a selection of contemporary workplace health and wellbeing issues. The focus throughout is on the interplay between law, science, and organisational practice on workplace health management. The module aims to stimulate (1) critical enquiry into the legislative, policy, and guidance frameworks that govern the management of workplace health and (2) reflection on the role of the workplace health practitioner in the application of law, policy and guidance, and their relationship with scientific theory and evidence, in the management of workplace health.  
   The module is assessed by a single essay in which the student is required to (a) critically consider the legislation, policy and guidance (national, sector, or organisation-specific) surrounding a particular occupational health issue of the student’s choosing or (b) critically consider the impact of a particular piece of national, sector, or organisation-specific legislation, policy or guidance on workplace health and wellbeing. Over the years students have chosen to focus on a wide range of topics including, workplace violence, asbestos legislation, needlestick injuries, bullying, stress, work-related driving, display screen equipment regulations, labour law as it relates to occupational health, confidentiality in law as it relates to HIV/AIDS, shiftwork, and many more.  
   "It allowed me to get to grips with the legislation and its strength for dealing with workplace health issues."  
  
 
     
  
     
  Diploma, MSc modules  
  
   Contemporary Issues in Workplace Health (three-day workshop)  
  
  
   Module Convenor: Professor Amanda Griffiths  
   Explores the developing range of health-related issues for today's workforce, and offers strategies for their management. Topics considered include the ageing workforce, work-life balance, health crises and business continuity, migrant/immigrant workers, diversity issues in health, design of the physical work environment, and work related driving.  
   "It was a very enjoyable and thought provoking few days. The Lecturers were excellent and of a very high calibre; it was good to meet the cohort ahead of us to network and brainstorm. Excellent overall."  
  
 
     
  
  
   Absence, Rehabilitation and Retention (three-day workshop)  
  
  
   Module Convenor: Professor Amanda Griffiths  
   Concerns sickness absence behaviour, its manifestations, monitoring and management as well as the emerging concept of presenteeism. Approaches to the management of return to work following sickness absence and the management of employees with chronic illness are considered alongside strategies to maximise retention.  
  
 
     
  
  
   (Optional) Health: Changing Attitudes and Behaviour (elearning)  
  
  
   Module Convenor: Dr Jonathan Houdmont  
   The workplace is an ideal location for health promotion activities given that it provides easy and frequent access to a large and captive population and it encourages sustained peer support. Indeed, workplace health promotion initiatives have a great potential to impact on employees' long-term health behaviours and lifestyle choices given that many employees spend 40-60% of their waking hours at work and eat one third to 50% of their meals at work. In response to the rise in workplace health promotion activities witnessed since the early 1990s and the growing appreciation of workplace health promotion as an integral component of organisational operations, this module considers: (a) key psychological theories of behaviour change that have informed the design of workplace health promotion activities and (b) the effectiveness of workplace health promotion interventions that have their focus on exercise, diet, smoking cessation, psychological health, and others.  
   The module is assessed by a single essay that requires students to produce a report for the named workplace health intervention of their choice (eg, smoking cessation, diet, exercise, substance abuse, psychological health or any other health issue that is of interest). Essays must include: (a) a description of the proposed intervention, (b) a description and critique of the psychological theory of behaviour change that underpins the proposed intervention, (c) a description and critique of similar interventions that have been reported in the published scientific literature, (d) an overview of the lessons that can be learned from these previous studies.  
   "The module translated into my workplace well and I can use the research and learning in my work. "  
  
 
     
  
  
   Workplace Health Research and Evaluation Methods (elearning)  
  
  
   Module Convenor: Dr Jonathan Houdmont  
   This module is about approaches to the design of workplace health studies, the collection of data, and the evaluation of that data with a view towards the construction of an evidence-based argument for the introduction of policies, procedures, and interventions that are designed to generate occupational health benefits. The emphasis throughout is on pragmatism in design, methods of data collection, analysis, and interpretation. The underlying guiding principle to the module content is that there is no point in workplace health practitioners learning about such issues if, upon completion of the module, they are unlikely to have developed the knowledge, confidence, and vocabulary required to explain, justify and implement studies in the organisational setting.  
   By the end of this module you should: (a) understand the nature of the research process, (b) be able to develop a research question, (c) understand the ingredients of good research design, (d) be familiar with a range of qualitative and quantitative approaches to data collection and aware of their strengths and limitations, and (e) be able to apply a host of qualitative and quantitative data analysis techniques.  
  
 
     
  
     
  MSc-only modules  
  
   Applied Research Project: Theory and Practice (e-learning)  
  
  
   Module Convenor: Dr Jonathan Houdmont  
   This final module is your opportunity to design and execute a workplace health research project that (a) uses the skills and knowledge that you have acquired during your studies, (b) demonstrates that you are capable of independent research that has the potential to make a difference in the workplace, and (c) demonstrates your ability to develop and reflect on your project management skills. The goal is to conduct a piece of organisational research that has real-world implications of which the scientific and practitioner communities ought to be made aware. Each year, following graduation, the project supervisors (Dr Jonathan Houdmont and Professor Amanda Griffiths) work with the authors of the best of the projects that they have supervised to produce a journal paper for publication. Recent examples include:  
   
    Houdmont, J., Munir, F., & Grey, M. (2013). Acceptance of repeat worksite HIV voluntary counselling and testing in a rural South African factory. AIDS Care.  
    Houdmont, J., Zhou, J., & Hassard, J. (2011). Overtime and psychological wellbeing among Chinese office workers. Occupational Medicine, 61, 270-273  
    Madgwick, P., Houdmont, J., & Randall, R. (2011). Sun safety measures among construction workers in Britain. Occupational Medicine, 61, 430-433  
   
   "The whole module has been an essential learning experience that has channelled the knowledge gained through the previous modules and has honed my research and writing skills."