Modules  
  Autumn semester  
  Immunity and the Immune System  
  This 10 credit module provides an overview of the mechanisms and concepts underpinning the science of immunology.  
  Molecular Basis of Cancer  
  This 20 credit module is made up of a series of lectures giving students an in-depth understanding of normal cell regulatory mechanisms and how these are altered during the carcinogenic process.  
  Tumour Immunology  
  This 10 credit module gives an overview of immunological approaches to cancer immunotherapy and immunological mechanisms and how these may be used to optimise therapeutic approaches.  
  Cancer Vaccines  
  This 20 credit module is made up of a series of lectures and discussion groups providing information on cancer vaccines. Topics include: what makes a good vaccine; different vaccine designs; animal models and immunological techniques. This module will cover subjects that have been introduced on the tumour immunology module in more depth.  
  Scientific Writing and Business Development  
  The 20 credit module focuses on the commercialism of research with lectures also on intellectual property. Invited speakers from industry will contribute to this module. In addition, students will learn how to write a business plan on a cancer immunotherapy concept. Students will work in groups to represent individuals in a company and they will develop their own novel concept and write a business plan.  
  Spring Semester  
  Monclonal Antibodies  
  This 20 credit module will provide information on the generation of monoclonal antibodies, clinical trials involving antibodies and the future uses of antibody therapy in cancer prevention.  
  Host-Tumour Interface  
  This 20 credit module will highlight the current understanding of the immunobiology of tumours. This will include the following topics: immunosurveillance, tumour resistance, regulatory T cells. antigenic targets, cytokine therapy, non-specific immunity and animal models.  
  Research Project  
  The research project is worth 60 credits. It will be undertaken on a tumour immunology related subject and will allow the student to learn the practical and intellectual skills necessary for scientific investigation. The student will also gain experience in project management and acquire more specialised skills related to the project. Students may be able to perform their projects in industrial placements. The module is assessed on progress reports (practical skills), an oral presentation and a write-up in the style of a scientific paper.  
  
   Examples of previous research projects  
  
  
   
    Production of a monoclonal antibody that kills ovarian cancer cells  
    An anti-endothelial vaccine targeting endothelin receptor B  
    Modulation of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor signalling on human dendritic cells to improve anti-cancer immune responses  
    Generation of recombinant ligand Fc fusion proteins to co-stimulate CD55 on T cells  
    Microencapsulation of Hepatitis B surface antigen protein and DNA using supercritical fluid technology  
    Perturbation of MAPK signalling pathways following exposure of dendritic cells to melanoma lysates  
    Identification of antigen specific T regulatory epitopes  
    Regulation of IL12, IL23 & IL27 gene expression in dendritic cells by malignant melanoma  
    Interleukin (IL)- 27 modifies CD28 and CD55 mediated costimulation of na&iuml;ve CD4+ T cells  
    Tumour-mediated regulation of dendritic cell interaction with lymphendothelium  
    Investigation of the effect of IL17 on MMP2 & 9 in breast cancer  
    Antigen specific generation of Tr1  
    Immune responses to tumour associated antigens in cancer  
    The role of CD55 in mouse colorectal cancer  
    Analysis of the tumour suppressor LIMD1 in breast cancer  
    Investigation of encapsulated tetanus toxoid antigen to generate a single-dose vaccine to tetanus  
   
  
 
     
  
  For more details on our modules, please see the module catalogue.