Modules  Modules include:
  
  
 
   Research methods and Resources 
  
 
   You will be introduced to the necessary skills and resources for postgraduate research alongside methodological and theoretical issues in theology and church history. Topics studied may include IT skills, library resources, the development of arguments, formatting and referencing and the relationship between academic research and religious commitment. You will be assessed through a 4000-word essay and a 1000-word account of the research undertaken. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Israelite Gospels 
  
 
   In this module you will consider a range of texts which simultaneously proclaim a belief in Jesus and endorse ritual purity from the first to the seventh centuries C. E. The religious movements constituted by the texts' audiences are placed in broader cultural contexts and defined in relation to gentile Christianity and rabbinic Judaism. Some of the texts studied may include John’s Revelation, the Gospel of Matthew, and the Clementine Homilies, as well as rabbinic and patristic heresiology. By the end of the module you will have an understanding of a variety of Late Ancient texts and how they continue to exercise influence today. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Early Christian Writings: Outside the Canonical Collection 
  
 
   You will be introduced to four or six (according the number of credits permitted) documents from early followers of Jesus in their entirety, with a focus on the growing distinctions during the period between Judaism and Christianity. This will lead to an examination of how these documents present the history of various early communities and their theological concerns, and how they can be used in theological understanding today. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Developing Tradition: Theologians of the Second Century 
  
 
   You will study four or six (according to the number of credits permitted) second-century Christian documents in their entirety, with a focus on their concerns. You will be provided with advanced training in the academic disciplines of patristics and historical theology, and be introduced to the development of Christian doctrine. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Emergence of the New Testament Canon 
  
 
   You will examine the factors in early Christianity which led to certain documents being accorded special status in the worship, memory and theology of the Christian community. You will also explore the emergence of a Christian canon of theology, and its significance for Christianity as another ‘lawful religion’ within the Roman Empire. Teaching will be delivered through a variety of ways including printed materials, on-line discussions with tutors and students, recorded interviews and lectures at the annual spring seminar. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Reading Medieval Theologians from Anselm to Ockham 
  
  
  
    This module offers a thorough introduction to a critical period in the development of the western church through the study of primary texts, in translation, from Anselm (c.1033 – 1109) to William of Ockham (c. 1285 – 1347). You will learn how theology was changed by the rise of the university, the recovery of Aristotle and the reception of Islamic thought, and Anselm’s theological method through documents ranging in genre from the formal academic to the liturgical. Alongside this, you will consider some of the characteristics of ‘scholasticism’.  
   
   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Virgin Mary in Christian Tradition 
  
 
   You will develop key skills in historical and systematic theology with reference to Christian doctrine and devotion concerning the Virgin Mary. You will study the development of the Marian cult in Western and Eastern traditions with emphasis on its spiritual, doctrinal and liturgical importance. The module will show how interest in the Virgin Mary increased in the first five centuries of the Church, before moving on to the scholastic philosophers’ interest in her relationship to God and the human race during the medieval period, and, finally, the differing perceptions of Mary in the modern era. The module will focus on the reading of primary sources, dating from the first to the twenty-first centuries, and assessing their importance within the Marian tradition as a whole. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Dante, Religion and Culture 
  
 
   This module will offer you the opportunity to read most of Dante’s most important works, including ‘Vita Nuova’ (his poetic autobiography), ‘Convivio’ (an invitation to a philosophic banquet) and ‘Commedia’ (his journey to hell, purgatory and heaven), in translation. The cultural and political background of the works will be considered, along with their theological, philosophical and mystical sources in the works of, amongst others, Bonaventure, Thomas Aquinas, Hugh of St. Victor and Aristotle. By the end of the module, you will have fostered an understanding of an important poet and lay theologian, as well as a general knowledge of medieval Christianity of his period.
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Richard Hooker: Prophet of Anglicanism 
  
 
   This module considers how the thought of Richard Hooker (1554-1600) has helped shape the development of the Church of England’s self-understanding over the centuries, with particular attention paid to Hooker’s writings and their interpretations. Alongside examination of Hooker and his world, you will consider the themes of reason, scripture, and justification by faith alone. The module will conclude by offering a study of the ways in which Hooker’s work speaks to modern theology. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Revivalism and Reform in Britain and America 1730-1860 
  
 
   You will investigate revivalism (both evangelical and catholic) and institutional ecclesiastical reform in Britain and America from the early Eighteenth century to the high Victorian years. Some of the topics may include The First and Second Great Awakenings, Ecclesiastical Reform 1800-1840, and Revivals of 1858 – 1860. Alongside this, you will develop a critical appreciation of primary sources and the flavour and content of Christian writings throughout the period.
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Churches and the Social Question in Britain 1815 – 1900 
   
  
 
   This module will investigate differing Christian perspectives on social questions from the end of the Napoleonic Wars to the dawn of the twentieth century. Some of the topics may include: ‘The Legacy of Malthus: Sumner, Chalmers and other political economy theologians’, ‘Jesus as a Social Reformer: Nineteenth Century Perspectives’, ‘Lux Mundi and its Legacy’, and ‘Fin de Si&egrave;cle Social Christianity: Cardinal Manning and the Nonconformist Conference’. Alongside this, you will develop a critical appreciation of primary sources and the flavour and content of Christian writings throughout the period.
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Christianity in Twentieth Century Britain 
  
 
   This module will introduce you to mainland British Christianity from the Edwardian period to its 1990s counterpart, alongside some of the social, political, cultural and theological themes which have re-appeared in the lives and thought of British Christians. Some of the topics covered may include: The First World War, Churches and the inter-war years, Disruption and Revival: 1940 – 1959, and The Millennium Ends: 1976 – 1999. You will also develop a critical appreciation of primary sources and the flavour and content of Christian writings throughout the period.
   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Directed Reading 
  
 
   This module aims to provide groundwork for later research for students intending to continue their studies to MPhil/ Ph.D. level. You will, in conjunction with a supervisor, pursue a plan of guided reading distinct both from the area of your dissertation and, usually, topics covered on other modules. The module will enable you to develop several key skills, including, amongst others: library resource skills, the compilation of bibliographies, the planning of independent study with long-term goals in mind, critical self-awareness, and the communication and development of sophisticated argument. 
   
   
  
 
     
  
  
 
   For more details on our modules, please see the 
  Module Catalogue.