Modules  
 Please note that module availability may change from year to year and different modules may be available from those detailed below. 
  Core modules  
  Professional Practice 1 (20 credits)    
  Designed to provide a work based learning opportunity, enabling the learner to evaluate dietetic practice critically and to adopt a reflective and critical approach to your work which will benefit your practice and that of your department. Taught content is minimal.   
  Professional Practice 2 (20 credits)   
  Designed to provide a work based learning opportunity, enabling the learner to demonstrate an improvement in professional practice expertise. You will also develop high level skills in experiential and reflective learning as a basis for lifelong learning and demonstrate an ability to recognise self transformation and self direction through the development of a learning contract. Taught content is minimal.   
  Research Strategies in Healthcare (20 credits)   
  This module is designed to enable health and community care practitioners to develop their skills of critical review and knowledge of research methods appropriate to their field of practice. The course equips you with knowledge concerning the importance of theoretical paradigms, research design, sampling strategies, data collection and analysis methodologies to healthcare research. It also focuses on the development of advanced search skills and the ability to integrate research findings into clinical practice.   
  Optional modules   
  Please note that module availability may change from year to year and different modules may be available from those detailed below.   
  Understanding and Changing Behaviour (20 credits)  
  Introduces fundamental concepts from biological, individual differences, cognitive, social and developmental psychology and their contribution to the understanding of health behaviour. You will also explore the health practitioner's role in understanding and changing health behaviour.   
  Enhancing Communication Skills for One to One Client Consultations (20 credits)    
  This module is designed to provide an understanding of the theoretical underpinnings and evidence base associated with the fundamental skills of one to one communication with clients. You will develop communication skills for use in one to one client consultations and develop your ability to reflect on practice and identify areas for future development.   
  Advanced Communication Skills for One to One Client Consultations (20 credits)    
  Opportunity to develop issues above   
  Paediatric Nutrition (20 credits)   
  A comprehensive understanding of the role of diet of children and young people and their requirements in health and disease, including the treatment of diseases like obesity, diabetes, cystic fibrosis, phenylketonuria, allergy, eating disorders and cancer with nutritional therapy.  
  Renal Nutrition (20 credits)   A comprehensive understanding of the role of diet and other treatments in the management of renal disease (chronic renal failure, end stage renal failure, acute renal failure and nephritic syndrome).   Public Health Nutrition Management (20 credits)   Taking examples of current national and local public health policy strategies and initiatives, this module provides an understanding of their management: planning, management of resources, and practical considerations in a range of settings, evaluation and implementation. You will study the development of values, standards, guidelines and agreed practices.   Public Health Nutrition Policy (20 credits)  An introductory understanding of the role of the health and social care professionals in the community in relation to strategic planning and nutrition policy in public health.   Obesity Management (20 credits)   Designed to increase awareness of the complexity of obesity from the point of view of both the patient and practitioner. Also to develop greater understanding of the tools, skills and strategies available to treat obesity, the evidence base for their use and their practical application.   Nutrition Support (20 credits)  
  Explores nutrition support strategies and provides dietitians with skills and knowledge to design, assess and monitor routine enteral and parenteral feeding regimens.   Advanced Clinical Supervisory Skills (20 credits)   The course is designed to enable students to have an understanding of the concept of learning and how it applies to clinical supervision of dietetic students.  
  Clinical Supervision (20 credits)  This module considers the evidence base associated with effective learning on placement, develop skills for use in placement supervision and enhance ability to reflect on practice.  Diabetes I (20 credits)  You will further your knowledge and understanding of the current trends and evidence base underpinning the dietary management of people with diabetes in order for you to achieve the competencies required to support more specialist skills. This module is aimed at the band 5 practitioner who is new to working in the area of diabetes.  Diabetes II (20 credits)  This module is designed for the practitioner who is working at band 6 level and already has a reasonable level of experience of working with people with diabetes.