Modules  
  Students take 60 credits of taught modules in Communication Studies:  
 
   Sociolinguistics of Work (15 credits) 
  
  
   This module is intended to familiarise students with theories and applications of sociolinguistics in relation to the context of work.  It will cover a range of sociolinguistic, workplace topics, including a focus upon the following: workplace cultures; language and identity, including gender, ethnicity, age, religion/nation and social class; miscommunication; intercultural communication; linguistic politeness and interactional sociolinguistics.  The module will emphasise the crucial relationship between social variables, power and communication in the workplace, and demonstrate how recourse to sociolinguistic analysis can illuminate and enhance communication in a range of workplaces.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Business and Organisational Communication (15 credits) 
  
  
   The module investigates the multidisciplinary subject of business and organisational communication. It covers a wide range of quantitative and qualitative approaches, examining how individuals and groups use spoken and written communication to get work achieved successfully.  The range of methodologies and analytical frameworks for interrogating business and organisational communication include: conversation analysis, corpus linguistics, critical discourse analysis, pragmatics and speech act theory, ethnography and genre analysis. The module also highlights contemporary issues emerging from the field, exploring, for instance, the influence of context, new multi-media technologies and globalisation on communication in commercial domains and organisational environments. The module emphasises how the findings of communicative research can be practically applied in teaching and training materials and in consultancy work.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Intercultural Communication (15 credits) 
  
  
   This module will explore the use of language in interactions between speakers of different cultural and linguistic backgrounds from three different perspectives: Description, Development, and Assessment. With a growing proportion of interactions in the world today taking place between people of diverse cultural backgrounds, it is important to identify and describe language use which may lead to misunderstanding and communicative breakdown. This module will look at ways in which language barriers might be overcome in such interactions, and at the key factors in this process. We will examine intercultural interactions in a variety of contexts, e.g. business and other professional encounters, the language of the media, the language classroom, etc.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Methods: Corpus Linguistics (15 credits) 
  
  
   Corpus linguistics provides methods for the study of collections of electronic texts (written texts, including literary texts, material from the internet, transcripts of spoken language, etc.). This module introduces fundamental corpus methods that include retrieving and interpreting word frequency information, studying patterns of words in the form of concordances, and analysing key words and key semantic domains. The lecture-style content of the module will explain basic concepts and illustrate methods through case studies. Through weekly hands-on sessions students will actively practice the use of corpus software. Throughout the module, students are encouraged to reflect on the applicability of a range of methods to their own areas of interest (e.g. literary linguistics, discourse analysis, ELT, etc.).  
  
 
     
  
     
  And 60 credits worth of Entrepreneurship modules:  
 
   Creative Problem Solving (10 credits) 
  
  
   The course will introduce students to the latest thinking in the areas of creativity, the creative process, knowledge management practices and the nature of entrepreneurship.  Having established the crucial link between creativity, entrepreneurship and economic development the course proceeds with the latest thinking in the areas of creativity, entrepreneurship and economic development the course proceeds with the latest thinking in the areas of creativity, the creative process and modern knowledge management practices supported by case studies and examples of successful applications.  Students will be introduced to a variety of creative problem solving techniques and learn how to apply these techniques in the context of the development, evaluation and application of ideas and concepts with commercial potential.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Finance and Accounting (10 credits) 
  
  
   Entrepreneurial activity can only succeed if supported by appropriate resources that are then managed to promote economic activity.  It is often the case that entrepreneurs have insufficient personal funds to develop a business without resort to external providers of finance.  This module will explore the major themes within accounting and finance that are relevant to entrepreneurs.  The first part of the module examines internal accounting procedures and accountability to external stakeholders.  The second part examines how entrepreneurs finance their venture and the different sources of funds involved at different stages of development.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Project Management (10 credits) 
  
  
   
    Definitions and classifications of projects.   
    Objectives in project management - time, costs, quality.   
    Resources and resource management.   
    Critical Path Methods and resource scheduling.   
    Performance measurement and costs.   
    Project lifecycles.   
    Project teams and leadership in project management.   
    Managing risk in projects.   
    Analysis of project successes and failures.   
    Project Management software.  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Marketing for Entrepreneurs (10 credits) 
  
  
   This module provides an introduction to the fundamental concepts of marketing and how they are currently applied in the marketplace.  The main emphasis of the module centres around the perceived need by managers for a strategic approach to marketing decision-making and for coherent planning to ensure the formulation of successful marketing programmes within an organisation.  This module will explore: the role and nature of marketing; the core elements of marketing as an approach to business; the processes which influence the development of a marketing strategy; the role of segmentation; targeting and positioning; the factors which determine the composition of the marketing mix; the role of elements of the marketing mix in creating an effective marketing campaign.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Innovation Management (10 credits) 
  
  
   
    Introduction - What is Innovation Management?  
    Building an Innovation Organisation  
    Innovation and Family Firms  
    External Guest Speaker  
    Sources of Innovation and Networks  
    Innovation Strategy and Blue Ocean Strategy  
    Selecting the Right Idea  
    Implementing Ideas  
    Capturing Learning  
    Group Presentations - Appraisal of Innovation Management of an Innovative Firm.   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Technology Entrepreneurship (10 credits) 
  
  
   The aim of this module is to offer students an appreciation of the entrepreneurial actions involved in the commercial exploitation of new science and technology inventions. This type of activity is increasingly recognized as vital for the commercialization of technology from Universities and research institutes into knowledge-driven organizations.  Political and sociological debates about the significance of technology transfer from universities will also be considered. The importance of intellectual property and patenting as a key asset in technology entrepreneurship will feature strongly in the module. Students will gain practical experience by researching and devising entrepreneurial strategies for commercializing novel science and technology ideas.  This will require working with real patents and patent searching to critically examine contextual (e.g., between industrial sectors and countries) and strategic differences (e.g., licensing deals, collaborations and new venture creation).  Technology entrepreneurs, Science Incubator managers and related professional services (e.g., IP lawyers, investors) will assist with the module at appropriate points.  
  
 
     
  
     
  Students complete the course with a Communication and Entrepreneurship Research Project (60 credits), in which they develop the commercial potential of their ideas and projects, or enhance communication within a business/commercial environment.  
  For more information on any of these modules, please see our module catalogue.   
  Please note that modules are subject to change.  
  Back to top