Course content 
 Semester 1 (Sept - Dec 2015) 
 Supporting Literacy Development 
  
  Develop your professional skills in coaching children to become fluent readers and writers and improve your understanding of the role of cultural scripts, identity and cognition in literacy development. 
  Explore the complexity of the recent research as it relates to assessment, classroom pedagogy and curriculum theory. 
 
 Children’s Literature & Literary Theory
  
  Deepen your knowledge of children’s literature, discuss the latest exciting authors and explore how they are being received by different sectors in society. 
  Find out about how literary theory informs our understanding of children’s literature from pre-school to mid-teens and learn about the historical and cultural changes in expectations, possibilities and social practices surrounding children’s literature. 
 
 Teaching Literacy Across All School Subjects
  
  Learn how to use literacy teaching to improve your students’ understanding and recall of discipline-specific subject knowledge, and how to help them write about it coherently and think about it more critically. 
  Explore how to select texts, integrate literacy teaching into subject-specific pedagogies and examine research findings about the value of teaching specific reading and writing strategies. 
 
 Semester 2 (Jan - April 2016) 
 Creativity, Literacies & Emotional-Social Development 
  
  Discover the cultural and cognitive importance of narrative and story and understand why engagement with literature produces long-term social benefits. 
  Explore the research on how professionals can use creative approaches and communal experiences of language, literature and social media to promote emotional well-being. 
 
 Language & Literacy Development in Childhood 
  
  Learn about how children’s language development impacts on their literacy. Understand common developmental trajectories in learning to use the sound systems and grammar of language, what can go wrong with these, and the links to reading and writing. 
  Discover the patterns of comprehension and linguistic development from birth to 16 years, and explore the research evidence-base on how professionals can usefully intervene when they find children and young people making slow progress. 
 
 Environments for Learning Literacy, Language & Literature 
  
  Explore the cultural and social influences on literacy and language in the home, school and community, and the evidence-based research into how language and literacy can be fostered in difficult and diverse circumstances. 
  Consider how education policy, curriculum design, implementation and pedagogical frameworks can impact to benefit disadvantaged groups. 
  NB: May be offered as an intensive course over the Easter school holiday period if there is sufficient demand. 
 
 MEd Modules  
 Dissertation 1: Methods & Ethics 
  
  Learn about the research methodologies you can use to investigate your own questions about children and young people’s literacy, language and literature, including approaches to research design, data collection and analysis. 
  Familiarise yourself with some of the ethical dilemmas of using research to inform practice and policy. 
 
 Dissertation 2: Final Report
 
   Develop your ideas from Dissertation 1 to carry out and report on your own unique research project relevant to the course. You will be supported by an academic expert with knowledge of the field. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is taught through small group seminars and lectures. You’ll be given reading and other reflective activities to carry out in your own time, which will be drawn on in the seminars. You'll also be invited to participate in a range of student and staff-led research seminars. 
 