Course content 
 Advanced Organic Chemistry
  
  This class aims to develop abilities to establish an appreciation of a range of distinct reagents and techniques that have the abilities to perform similar synthetic transformations and, by taking an overview, to develop the abilities to discern the comparative advantages and disadvantages of the individual reagents and techniques. 
  Ultimately, this class will provide the ability to apply knowledge and understanding gained in the course to the solution of problems and to the prediction of chemical properties of previously unseen compounds or reactions. 
 
 Chemical Biology
  
  This class aims to introduce you to modern methods of analysing biomolecules by concentrating on the use and outcomes of the various techniques. This will cover a broad range of techniques, which will be taught in context with examples from real life problems and using, where possible, modern software. Additionally, the course will examine aspects of DNA damage and repair, the role of post-translational modifications together with modern concepts in target validation. 
 
 Principles of Modern Medicinal Chemistry
  
  The course will focus on the principles and practice of modern medicinal chemistry, with particular emphasis on worked examples, including an industry-led full day workshop. Specific focus on the gene family approach will be made, highlighting the key role of these receptors and enzymes in regulating cell signalling. Allied to the medicinal chemistry aspects of the class, modern synthetic chemistry techniques spanning the rubric of organic synthesis are also discussed in depth. 
 
 Advanced Biochemical Methods
  
  This class aims to provide you with an overview of many commonly used techniques across the spectrum of biological and biomedical sciences. The main deliverable from the course will be to enable you to apply specific techniques to address problems in biosciences. 
 
 Project & Dissertation
  
  This class addresses the rationale and methodology behind conducting a research project in medicinal chemistry. The class will require you to produce a research plan, develop the plan to conduct a specific research study supported by relevant literature and finally to produce a thesis for assessment. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 Teaching of theory and applications is through lectures and tutorials. The material is further reinforced with practical sessions, which provide hands-on experience with a wide range of modern instrumental techniques. 
 