Course content 
 You must take three specialist modules if you’re studying for the Postgraduate Certificate and up to five if you’re studying for a Postgraduate Diploma or MSc. 
 Successful completion of six modules leads to the award of a Postgraduate Certificate. 
 Process Design Principles 
  
  The focus of this module is on the principles of conceptual design and flowsheet development. 
  You’ll focus on defining “design” and the associated terminology, and showing how this can be applied to equipment and process selection. You’ll also develop an understanding of the hierarchical and structural methods of developing conceptual designs including the effective design of utility systems to reduce energy use. 
 
 Safety Management Practices
  
  This module provides you with an advanced level exposure to the role of management and management systems in safety and loss prevention. 
  It will involve in-depth analysis of major incidents in recent history: pinpointing the structure of Safety Management Systems, approach to Auditing Safety Management, the role of Human Factors, and the process and concept of safe design. This course will also involve developing Site Emergency Plans and Accident Investigation skills, as well as a review of legal structure for the UK. 
 
 Multi-phase Processing
  
  This module helps you to understand important concepts and principles in multi-phase processes and their application to chemical engineering. The concepts are limited to those involving only incompressible Newtonian fluids with flow through circular pipes and simple mixing in tanks. 
 
 Petrochemical Engineering
  
  This module will look at: 
   
   the concepts of origin and formation of petroleum, and types and quality of refinery feedstock and products 
   various sections of petroleum processing in refineries 
   refinery economics and planning 
   advanced topics in petrochemical engineering such as catalyst development, desulphurisation, pollution control and hydrogen production 
   
 
 Membrane Technology
  
  This module aims to provide you with a deeper understanding of membrane technology including: 
   
   advanced systems and processes for manufacture 
   research and innovation in novel applications and materials 
   markets and applications, particularly emerging applications 
   theoretical models describing membrane performance 
   
 
 Fuel Cells
  
  This module provides you with an introduction to the fuel cell industry. The module covers: 
   
   technical aspects like construction 
   choice of materials 
   different electrolytes 
   potential outputs 
   alternative fuel cycle 
   waste 
   sustainability 
   
 
 Emerging Technologies
  
  This module is an introduction to key research areas across Chemical Engineering and Chemistry that are of industrial importance in the medium term. It will include a range of advanced technologies that support the innovation, design and development of processes that are more efficient, cleaner and have a reduced impact on the environment. 
 
 Molecular Simulation in Chemical Engineering
  
  This module looks at: 
   
   how chemical engineering processes operate at a molecular scale and how the molecular scale eventually determines what happens at the process scale 
   the usefulness of molecular simulation in chemical engineering 
   the theoretical framework that underlies molecular simulations, thermodynamics and basic statistical mechanics 
   molecular simulation conventions 
   transferable skills useful for obtaining measurements from simulations, analysing data and communication of technical data and ideas 
   
 
 Nuclear Engineering
  
  This module gives you an introduction to the nuclear industry. The module covers: 
   
   radiation - fission & fusion 
   reactor technology 
   shielding 
   health physics 
   nuclear fuel cycle 
   nuclear waste 
   nuclear proliferation 
   safety 
   sustainability 
   
 
 Model-based Process Control 
  
  This module covers part of the requirements necessary for the IChemE’s new Process Automation Specialist syllabus. The module is directed at advanced control techniques and is particularly concerned with process modelling and then the use of such models in model-based control schemes. 
 
 Sustainability 
  
  This class aims to provide you with an understanding of the concepts of sustainability and sustainable development. The social, environmental and economic impact of development strategies will be identified and the mitigation of negative impacts discussed. 
 
 Environmental Impact 