Course content 
 Business Skills Development sessions take place over both years of the course. 
 Year 1 
 Compulsory classes
 These classes take place on Tuesday afternoon and evening each week during the semester 
  
 Expand AllCollapse All-->
 HRM in a Business Context
  
  This class aims to explore the managerial and business context of HRM and the associated impact in shaping human resource strategy. 
  It critically reviews the major internal and external contextual factors influencing organisational strategy and examines the key choices facing HR managers in designing and delivery of HR practices. 
  The class recognises that HRM occurs in a variety of organisational, social and political contexts and evaluates the significance of these variations for the strategic organisation and management of people. Fundamentally the class examines how organisational and HR strategies are shaped by the dynamic nature of the business context, the underpinning goals of employers and considerations of social and ethical legitimacy. 
 
 Human Resource Development
  
  This class provides you with a comprehensive view of the field of human resource development, learning and change for individuals and organisations. 
  The class considers theories and practice in the management of workplace learning and development. We encourage the development of a critical view of HRD theory and practice, to develop your capabilities as HR professionals in work and employment. HR professionals who are able to think critically about HRD are better problem-solvers and decision-makers, on the broader social implications of changes taking place in organisations and the challenges these changes pose to HRD. 
 
 People Resourcing
 
   This class will help you understand people resourcing issues within organisations and related concepts in order that they become thinking practitioners in the field. Issues such as managing performance, managing equality and managing careers will be covered. 
 
 Year 2 
 These classes take place on Wednesday afternoon and evenings each week during the semester 
 Managing Human Resources
  
  This class is concerned with exploring some of the current debates, developments and trends in the management of human resources and particularly managing for results. 
  In doing so, it will cover several areas of research interest.   The lectures are based on problem-driven teaching. This approach means that each lecture will revolve around a key question or set of key questions being asked about HRM or which HR professionals face and the extent to which HR professionals can contribute to enhancing organisational performance. 
 
 Employee Relations
  
  This class will provide a critical understanding of current developments in employee relations in the UK. 
  You'll learn about the dynamics and shape of the employment relationship with particular attention focussed on exploring the resilience of the traditional institutions and modes of employment regulation, as well as exploring current attempts to recast the dynamics of employee relations. 
 
 Employee Reward
 
   You'll become familiar with different pay systems and structures and will develop an understanding of the interdisciplinary nature of the foundations of pay in this module, enabling you to develop a critical understanding of pay systems and structures. 
  
 Elective classes
 Choose one from this list 
 Employment Issues & the Law
 
   Employment law plays a role in shaping the work of personnel specialists. You'll be introduced to important aspects of UK employment law with the aim of examining the nature and extent of its impact on employment relationships, policies and practices, and will gain knowledge of the way in which employment law is formed through European UK legislation and directives. 
 
 Business Systems
  
  
   This class focuses on comparative political economy and the variety of business systems that frame and shape employment policies and practices at firm and state level.
   
  
   The class looks at the structures, strategies and practices of the transnational firm, and their consequences for employment relations. This is then linked to the now extensive debates about the character and scope of globalisation and global flows of goods and labour. Bringing these two themes together, the class   will examine in detail theory and practices of global value chains and production networks with respect to labour issues. The consequences of these dynamics for policy making with respect to corporate governance and responsibility will provide an additional practical focus.
   
  
 Learning & teaching 
 There'll be a series of taught modules, seminars, guest lectures given by distinguished HR professionals, and a business skills development programme. 
 