Course content 
 Year 1 
 Compulsory classes 
 Industrial Group Project 
 
   This class aims to integrate and apply design, manufacturing and management knowledge and skills, acquired in previous years of the course, to an industry based product development project and to develop team project skills. 
 
 Global Design
 
   This class aims to prepare students with the knowledge, skills and experience to become competent members of global/distributed design teams. 
 
 People, Organisation & Technology
 
   This class aims to introduce you to the “softer” aspects of change management. In other classes you will have learned how to identify areas for improvement in organisations, tools and techniques to model organisations and to implement change. This class complements these things and looks at the human implications of change. 
 
 Strategic Technology Management
 
   This class aims to provide you with a high-level understanding and knowledge of the role of technology in business strategy for maintaining market competitiveness. 
 
 Supply Chain Operations
  
  The class aims to provide you with an in-depth knowledge and understanding of those key concepts, methods, tools and techniques that are fundamental to effective and efficient running of supply chain operations from suppliers’ suppliers to customers’ customers. 
  On completion you'll be able to design and manage operational supply chain planning, monitoring and control systems for complex and disparate operations. 
 
 Design Methods
 
   This class aims to enable you to select and apply appropriate design methods as a part of the design process. 
 
 Management Of Innovation
  
  This class aims to identify, create and exploit opportunities for innovation on a systematic basis. In this class, all aspects of managing innovation; from recognizing the need and desire to be creative and innovative, using imagination to add value, developing structures, systems and incentives that encourage and implement innovation, will be discussed. We will examine what management of innovation is, how science and invention fuel different kinds of innovation, such as technological innovation, and the many organizational challenges that are presented by the inevitable evolution of new technology. 
  Topics that are addressed include: 
   
 
 understanding the nature of technology 
 preparing for emerging technologies 
 organising to innovate 
 types of innovation 
 the management of technology projects 
 
   
  
   The class is organised around lectures, class discussions, guest speakers from the sciences, engineering, and business, case analysis, exercises, and project work.
   
 
 Design Management
 
   To provide a structured introduction to the Design Management process, issues and tools. 
  
 Elective classes
 Choose from this list 
 Product Design Techniques
  
  This class aims to : 
   
   introduce design techniques at advanced level 
   enable you to understand the application of advanced product design engineering techniques in product development, in particular in mechatronic systems 
   provide opportunities for you to develop technology focused products or systems within the class supervised environment, including partial system evaluation and prototyping 
   
 
 Strategic Supply Chain Management
 
   This class aims to provide you with a critical understanding of the fundamental building blocks of Supply Chain Management and e-Supply Chains from a Strategic perspective. This is with a view to developing your capabilities in modelling, analysing, diagnosing and re-designing/improving supply chains. 
 
 Enterprise Resource Planning
 
   To develop a critical understanding of operation, structure and implementation issues around ERP systems as used in industry. 
 
 Knowledge Engineering & Management For Engineers
 
   This class aims to give you an understanding of the types of knowledge, techniques and systems used in building knowledge based systems and to discuss the application of these techniques. 
 
 Engineering Risk Management
 
   This class aims to enable you to understand the basic principles and techniques of engineering risk management and demonstrate the appropriate application of this knowledge within an engineering context. 
 
 Management Of Total Quality & Continuous Improvement
 
   To provide you with an in-depth understanding of the main principles, concepts, tools and techniques of quality management and continuous improvement together with an awareness of how in practice these could be integrated to design and deliver an integrated continuous improvement programme.
  
  This class is run as a self-directed learning module where the formal lectures are replaced by comprehensive e-learning materials and a detailed learning programme. The learning is supported through comprehensive tutorials. 
 
 Fundamentals Of Lean Six Sigma
  
  The objective of this class is to introduce the participants to the principles of Lean Six Sigma thinking, tools and techniques of Lean Six Sigma and understand the wider implications of the broader strategic issues of organisation management and how they impact on continuous improvement programme. 
  On completion of the class you should be able to understand the theory and practical application of Lean Six Sigma methodologies within a holistic process improvement framework. This will enable their businesses to become more efficient, cost effective and much more profit oriented in today’s competitive marketplace. 
 
 Sustainable Product Design & Manufacturing
  
  One of the major challenges of modern industry is to address the need for sustainable product development and manufacturing. International legislation and increasing costs of fiscal instruments such as the landfill tax now aim to force producers to reduce the environmental impacts of their products and processes. Accelerating globalization and industrialization continues to exacerbate complexity of sustainability. Whilst manufacturers are constantly required to lower their costs and maintain their competitiveness, legislations require them to look at lifecycle costs. 
  This class addresses these global concerns by studying lifecycle considerations for a sustainable and profitable product development and manufacture. The latest environmental legislation will also be studied along with product development concepts and strategies that will enable industry to meet these increasingly severe competitive, environmental and legislative pressures. The associated practical, hands- on sessions maximize the usefulness of the skills acquired in real-life operational industry setting. 
 
 Product Costing & Financial Management
 
   This class aims to provide you with an understanding of strategic aspects of finance in relation to the decision-making process and analysis necessary for efficient management of supply chains. 
 
 Systems Thinking & Modelling
 
   The objective of this class is to introduce you to the theories and principles behind systems thinking. The class will also introduce you to the methods, tools and techniques for modelling, analysing, improving and designing systems in a variety of organisations, including industrial, commercial and public sector. 
 
 Information Management
  
  This class aims to give you an understanding of the types of different approaches, techniques and systems used in building information based systems. 
  In particular to: 
   
   introduce you to the software engineering process, identifying information requirements and visual modelling 
   acquire a basic understanding of information storage, retrieval, and systems 
   provide an appreciation and basic skills in the process of developing information systems 
   familiarise you with information technology, how to model and use information and in introduction into a way of representing information on a computer based system 
   
 
 Year 2
 You'll have the opportunity to study at two of the universities. 
 Hamburg University of Technology
  
  If you choose to spend your second year at Hamburg University of Technology you’ll focus on: 
   
   market research for (radical) innovation 
   cross-functional cooperation at the front end of the innovation process 
   managing innovation projects over geographical and functional/divisional borders 
   preparing the market introduction of new products and services 
   
  Compulsory classes 
   
   Product Strategy 
   Marketing For Innovation 
   Technology & Innovation Management 
   Managing International Team-based Product Development 
   Business Planning 
   
  Optional classes   
  Choose three from: 
   
   International Law 
   International Business Management 
   Quality Management 
   Production Process Organisation 
   International Economics 
   International Logistics 
   German as Foreign Language 
   Ethics for Engineers 
   
 
 Aalborg University
  
  If you spend your second year at Aalborg University, you’ll undertake an industrial internship at a Danish company. You’ll gain relevant global innovation management work experience. 
  You’ll be assigned an internship that best reflects your own interests from the available placements. 
  You’ll document the internship in a report. 
  Completion of the internship will provide further experience of many of the skills required for the Semester 4 thesis project. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The programme is delivered in English at all of the universities.