Course content 
 Compulsory subjects: 
  
  Professional Practice & Ethics 
  Business & Financial Awareness 
  Conveyancing 
  Private Client 
  Civil Litigation 
  Criminal Litigation 
  Personal Injury Claims Handling 
  
 Plus a choice of five from the following electives: 
  
  Advanced Criminal Advocacy 
  Advanced Private Client 
  Business Accounting for Legal Professionals 
  Commercial Contracts & IP 
  Commercial Conveyancing 
  Company Law 
  Employment Law in Practice 
  Family Business 
  Family Law 
  Mediation & Mediation Advocacy 
  Practical Public Administration 
  Work-Based Learning Module in Legal Practice 
  
 Full-time students 
 Teaching is mostly from Tuesday to Thursday each week. There’s a further dedicated skills training period in week one of semester two. 
 Part-time students 
 Teaching takes place primarily from 6pm to 8 pm on Tuesday to Thursday. 
 Learning & teaching 
 You’re assigned to firms of four at the start of the course. Most of the teaching and learning is done in your firms. Teaching and supervision is provided by practising solicitors, who have been trained as course tutors. 
 In addition to learning legal subjects, you’ll also develop generic skills which you’ll require for your professional life including: 
  
  problem solving 
  oral and written presentations 
  interviewing 
  negotiating 
  
 Our virtual community & learning environment 
 The background to much of our practical work is the award- winning ‘virtual’ community of Ardcalloch. Ardcalloch is a town we’ve created. A wide variety of events take place in the town which give rise to legal issues of one kind or another for its citizens. This initiative has a world- wide reputation in legal education. 
 All these activities are conducted on and supported by the SIMPLE (Simulated Professional Learning Environment) IT process. This allows student firms to interact with clients, fellow firms and other simulated characters throughout a real transaction. 
 We have standardised clients who are specially trained ‘clients’ who assess and give feedback to you on your performance of legal skills. 
 Most of our electives involve active participation such as: 
  
  students conducting Employment Tribunal hearings before real Tribunal judges 
  conducting a criminal trial in the Sheriff Court 
  having client meetings in the negotiation of family disputes 
  
 One of the most positive aspects of the course is the opportunity provided to meet both fellow students and tutors. They’ll become fellow practitioners, and your paths will cross regularly during your working life in this relatively small legal jurisdiction. 
 What do students think of the learning & training they receive? 
 Here’s a few comments from our graduates: 
 "I think the firm concept works very well and I cannot speak highly enough of their use as a learning tool." 
 "The method of teaching is very effective. The firm work allows for us to make any mistakes in a safe environment and prepare us for our traineeships. " 
 "The teaching approach is very unique. Students have hands on approach to learning. The firm experience was very efficient in promoting good work. The general experience is one of a kind."