Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Semester 1 
 Professional Management Practice
  
  This class develops your awareness and capabilities as a manager. It utilises a Personal Development Plan (PDP) process to help you critically evaluate how your skills and attributes are needed to be effective and, over the course of the year, provides workshops and exercises to help you identify and move towards fulfilling your potential. 
 
 Managing Across Cultures 
  
  This class will develop the awareness, skills and knowledge required by managers seeking to work abroad as international executives. It'll help you develop an awareness, knowledge and understanding of the importance of the often overlooked 'soft skills' of management, particularly as concerns cross-cultural variations and their impact on the practices and processes of management. It'll examine the main concepts currently employed to understand the complexity presented to managers in their process of managing people across national and cultural borders, addressing the issues of the impact of culture on management structures and processes. It will then provide understanding of the role which cross-cultural management can play in achieving competitive advantage in international business. 
 
 Managing People in Organisations
  
  With organisations increasingly becoming global in scale and ever more interconnected, understanding the challenges this presents for managing those employed by firms is vitally important. This class provides insight into how organizations function and how this influences individual behaviour. It will also help you understand the key theories that will make you a more effective manager and leader. 
 
 Semester 2 
 Marketing Management 
  
  The nature of how we think about ‘markets’, and the activities involved in trying to understand and communicate with customers, is changing rapidly. This class examines contemporary international practice, exploring the major concepts and techniques involved in the marketing planning process. It will help you analyse what companies are offering, how customers behave, and ultimately identify what they need to do next to deliver on their objectives. 
 
 Global Business Environment
  
  Business organisations and management decisions and actions exist in a complex, dynamic and often turbulent environment. This class will develop your understanding of the many dimensions and layers of the global business environment. It'll encourage you to recognise, understand and reflect upon the challenges and opportunities that various aspects of the business environment present to businesses, organisations and managers operating in an international context. The class will also introduce you to a range of useful theories, concepts and tools for analysing the business environment and give them an opportunity to apply these to ‘real world’ and hypothetical management scenarios. 
 
 Finance and Financial Management
  
  This class will introduce you to the principles needed to understand the nature of financial markets and institutions, corporate financial theory and financial decision making. It examines the core concepts and valuation models involved in pricing securities, the choices firms make over how to fund themselves and the techniques used to evaluate internal investment proposals. 
 
 Semester 3 
 Project Methodology
  
  This class introduces you to a range of different methodological approaches to conducting research and key issues researchers are commonly faced with (eg relevance of practitioner engagement, ethics). You'll be provided with a broad overview of research choices and issues from the perspective of Strathclyde staff representing each department in the Business Faculty who will present vignettes from their own research projects. 
 
 Business Strategy
  
  This class provides opportunities to explore, understand and apply the language of strategy and strategic management. By examining real-life organizations, you'll develop your understanding of the forces within their contextual and transactional environments that influence their strategy, and by applying different strategic frameworks, develop the ability to critically analyse the strategic direction being adopted. 
 
 International Entrepreneurship
  
  Designed to highlight the importance of entrepreneurship in the international arena, this class will enable you to use your learning from their other classes in a context relating to the practical application of the business-related theory covered. 
  The class also highlights the importance of the practical testing of business ideas to see if they are viable business opportunities within international contexts as well as the shaping of business ideas in relation to cross-cultural differences. 
  The importance of business idea generation, opportunity evaluation and the entrepreneurial mindset is addressed as is the importance of the market context. 
 
 Consultancy in Practice 
  
  This class is aimed at developing effective and reflective practitioners/managers. It'll provide you with the opportunity to deploy many aspects of your learning by engaging with a live issue provided by a client company. 
  It begins with a review of key  theories and tools  that  you'll have studied as part of  your degree, with consideration given on how to use these in this exercise. This is followed by analysis of material provided by the client which describes the issue to be addressed and the outcome expected by the client. This then leads into a group activity which applies particular techniques for addressing aspects of  the client’s issue. More detailed client input is provided  at certain points in  the process often through direct interface with the client. This  allows  you to gain a more in-depth understanding of the issue and to try out various solutions. Further analysis is carried out by the groups and the class concludes with you presenting your thinking to their client.  The client presentations are  then followed by a reflective session where the tutor, client and students are encouraged to explore the process of the class and develop the learning gained. 
 
 The MIM Project 
  
  The MSc in International Management project gives you the opportunity to engage with a topic of interest in depth and over an extended period of time. Preparation for the project is provided via a course in project methodology training. At this stage of the programme, you may be interested in aligning career aspirations with project work. 
 
 Electives
  
  In order to help you develop new skills and/or extend your knowledge in areas you see as relevant to your personal learning objectives, you're asked to undertake two elective classes. 
  These classes are chosen from a wide portfolio of elective subjects, which are revised annually to reflect the latest business thinking. In the past students have chosen from these classes: 
   
   Brand Management and Strategy 
   Foundations of Risk 
   New Venture Creation 
   Programme and Project Management 
   Games of Strategy 
   Leadership 
   Strategic Financial Management 
   Management of International Relationships 
   Change Agency 
   Developing Skills for Effective Management Consulting 
   Social Media: Strategy and Management 
   Managing in Europe (taught at Toulouse Business School, France) 
   
  A full list of the electives available in the 2015/2016 academic year will be provided during Semester 2.   
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is taught through a combination of: 
  
  lectures 
  workshops 
  group learning exercises 
  
 You’ll have the opportunity to identify and develop the 'soft skills' needed as a future international manager or leader. 
 The course provides: 
  
  lifelong learning skills: to recognise developmental needs as international managers and leaders, and identifying opportunities to tackle these 
  research, analysis and problem-solving skills: to develop skills in the use of library and internet-based resources; to identify, analyse and critically evaluate the strategic choices and options facing international managers 
  application skills: to apply models, tools and techniques of international management to different company, country and sectoral contexts; to integrate the knowledge from a range of international management subjects 
  communication skills: to develop report writing skills; to structure and present complex data and ideas; to make effective presentations and to acquire skills in argument and debate 
  team-working skills: to appreciate the benefits and challenges of working within teams; to apply theory to practice in operating within multicultural teams; to experience problem-solving within multicultural teams; to improve time management and workload planning capacities 
  
 Collaborative learning 
 The course is designed to be a collaborative learning experience, a partnership between academic staff and students. It enables you to build upon your collective understanding in interrogating the global issues impacting organisations. 
 Guest lectures 
 This course has a wide and varied range of industry speakers on an ad-hoc basis. 
 