Course content 
 Classes
 The combination of taught elements and studio design elements constitute the PgDip part of the course. 
 Urban Design History
  
  The class covers  how elements such as streets, squares, urban blocks have changed through time and what factors shaped them. 
 
 Urban Theory 
  
  You'll look at how urban ideas, theories and approaches have responded to contextual conditions in time and how they have shaped human lives and the environment for generations to come. Also explored is the current urban challenges and the fit of current urban design tools and approaches. 
 
 Development Process & Urban Design Policy & Practice
  
  This class looks at the economic, policy and implementation aspects of urban design, studied through theory and practical examples. 
 
 Urban Transport Planning 
 
   The role of transportation and infrastructure in the development of the city and the impact of various means of movement on liveability and quality of life are covered in this module. 
 
 Urban Landscape Design 
  
  You'll look at the impact of the urban landscape on human wellbeing and perception and the role of ecological networks as an integral part of urban form. 
 
 Urban Design Representation 
  
  Key tools for the effective representation and visual communication of urban design ideas, strategies, projects. 
 
 Sustainability
  
  We'll cover the impact of growth on social, economic and environmental sustainability. 
 
 Studio 
  
  The studio element of the course involves the strategic and detailed work of a complex urban area and is linked to the taught courses. It's generally based on a 'commission' by a client with whom we keep in regular contact during the year through meetings and public events. It's an intensive piece of work but very rewarding. 
  
 Dissertation
 MSc students only 
 Dissertation Project
  
  To achieve the award of MSc in Urban Design you're required to undertake an additional piece of research which you'll select in agreement with staff. It generally stems from a topic of special interest addressed by one of the taught classes or the design work. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 Courses are taught through lectures, seminars and studio work as well as a piece of research (MSc students only). 
 Lectures and seminars are delivered through a variety of modes including short intensive sessions to allow for flexible booking by CPD and part-time students. There's also occasional site visits.   
 The taught element of the course starts from a solid grounding in urban design history and theory. It then concentrates on current urban challenges, from climate change to the pressures for development in both developed and developing countries. It culminates with the research work carried out in the Urban Design Studies Unit and teaches you the unit’s ethos and approach to urbanism.   
 Guest lectures 
 We regularly organise a guest lecture series linked to the taught and design element of the course. The Urban Design Studies Unit also organise specialist events. In the coming session students of the course will be involved in a week-long seminar/event with the famous advocate-urbanist and writer Chuck Wolfe. 
 Recent speakers include: 
  
  Joan Callis, Benedetta Tagliabue EMBT, Architects to the Scottish Parliament 
  Prof Neil Spiller, Professor of Architecture and Digital Theory, Rachel Armstrong Senior Lecturer in Research and Enterprise, University of Greenwich 
  Andres Duany, Principal Duany Plater Zyberk and Company 
  Andy Cameron, Author of Manual for Streets, Director WSP 
  Murray Grigor, Photographer and Film Maker 
  Prof Ian Borden, Author and Professor of Architecture, Bartlett, UCL 
  Richard Murphy OBE, Architect 
  Gordon Benson, Benson and Forsyth. Museum of Scotland, National Museum of Ireland 
  Professor C J Lim, Vice-Dean at The Bartlett Faculty of the Built Environment at University College London. Has 4 RIBA President’s Medals International Teaching Awards 
  Chris McAvoy, Steven Holl Architects, Glasgow School of Art Reid Building. 
  
 