Course content 
 Compulsory classes
 
 For students studying Design Engineering with Sustainability, additional specialisation in Sustainability, Sustainability Product Design and Manufacturing, Remanufacturing. 
 For students studying Design Engineering with Advanced Product Development, additional specialisation in Advanced Materials & Production Technology, Product Design Techniques, Engineering Risk Management.
  
 Global Design 
 
   This class aims to prepare students with the knowledge, skills and experience to become competent members of global/distributed design teams. 
 
 Design Methods
 
   This class aims to enable you to select and apply appropriate design methods as a part of the design process. 
 
 Product Modelling & Visualisation
 
   This class aims to enable you to understand the concepts of multi-perspective product modelling and techniques used to visualise better products before they are fully designed and manufactured. 
 
 Design Management
 
   To provide a structured introduction to the Design Management process, issues and tools. 
 
 Group Project
 
   This class aims to enable you to understand the concepts of multi-perspective product modelling and techniques used to visualise better products before they are fully designed and manufactured. 
 
 Masters Project 
 
   The aim of the individual project is to develop your project development skills and to combine many of the aspects learned during other classes within a specific topic and a coherent body of work. This will be achieved through carrying out work into a particular topic relating to their theme and preparing a dissertation. 
 
 Optional classes 
  People, Organisation & Technology
 
   This class aims to introduce you to the “softer” aspects of change management. In other classes you will have learned how to identify areas for improvement in organisations, tools and techniques to model organisations and to implement change. This class complements these things and looks at the human implications of change. 
 
 Strategic Supply Chain Management 
 
   This class aims to provide you with a critical understanding of the fundamental building blocks of supply chain management and e-supply chains from a strategic perspective. This is with a view to developing your capabilities in modelling, analysing, diagnosing and re-designing/improving supply chains. 
 
 Strategic Technology Management 
 
   This class aims to provide you with a high-level understanding and knowledge of the role of technology in business strategy for maintaining market competitiveness. 
 
 Supply Chain Operations
 
   The class aims to provides you with an in-depth knowledge and understanding of those key concepts, methods, tools and techniques that are fundamental to effective and efficient running of supply chain operations from suppliers’ suppliers to customers’ customers. On completion you'll be able to design and manage operational supply chain planning, monitoring and control systems for complex and disparate operations. 
 
 Enterprise Resource Planning 
 
   To develop a critical understanding of operation, structure and implementation issues around ERP systems as used in industry. 
 
 Engineering Risk Management 
 
   This class aims to enable you to understand the basic principles and techniques of engineering risk management and demonstrate the appropriate application of this knowledge within an engineering context. 
 
 Management of Total Quality & Continuous Improvement 
 
   To provide you with an in-depth understanding of the main principles, concepts, tools and techniques of quality management and continuous improvement together with an awareness of how in practice these could be integrated to design and deliver an integrated continuous improvement programme. This class is run as a self-directed learning module where the formal lectures are replaced by comprehensive e-learning materials and a detailed learning programme. The learning is supported through comprehensive tutorials. 
 
 Fundamentals of Lean Six Sigma 
 
   The objective of this class is to introduce the participants to the principles of Lean Six Sigma thinking, tools and techniques of Lean Six Sigma and understand the wider implications of the broader strategic issues of organisation management and how they impact on continuous improvement programme. On completion of the class you should be able to understand the theory and practical application of Lean Six Sigma methodologies within a holistic process improvement framework. This will enable their businesses to become more efficient, cost effective and much more profit oriented in today’s competitive marketplace. 
 
 Product Costing & Financial Management 
 
   This class aims to provide you with an understanding of strategic aspects of finance in relation to the decision-making process and analysis necessary for efficient management of supply chains. 
 
 System Thinking & Modelling 
 
   The objective of this class is to introduce you to the theories and principles behind systems thinking. The class will also introduce you to the methods, tools and techniques for modelling, analysing, improving and designing systems in a variety of organisations, including industrial, commercial and public sector. 
 
 Design of Experiments for Process Optimisation 
 
   An introduction to statistically planned experiments 
 
 Sustainability
  
 
 Sustainable Product Design & Manufacturing
 
   The module addresses the global concerns relating to sustainable product development and manufacturing which companies face in terms of reducing the environmental impacts of their products and processes. 
 
 Remanufacturing
 
   The aim of this module is to develop a detailed understanding of the evolution of sustainable manufacture with a particular emphasis on the implications of adopting remanufacturing approaches. 
 
 Advanced Materials & Production Technology 
  
  This class aims: 
   
   to educate you in the fundamentals of advanced materials and processing methods and advanced surface engineering 
   to help you gain knowledge of advanced machining processes and technologies, rapid tooling and rapid-manufacturing 
   to educate you in the principles and practices of green manufacturing and manufacturing sustainability 
   
 
 Product Design Techniques 
  
  This class aims to: 
   
   introduce design techniques at advanced level 
   enable you to understand the application of advanced product design engineering techniques in product development, in particular in mechatronic systems 
   provide opportunities for you to develop technology focused products or systems within the class supervised environment, including partial system evaluation and prototyping 
   
 
 Design Form & Aesthetics 
  
  To develop a theoretical and practical understanding of design form and aesthetics. 
 
 Human Centred Design 
 
   Gain a theoretical and practical understanding of Human Centered Design.