Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Gaelic 1: Gr&agrave;mar, fuaimneachadh agus cainnte l&agrave;itheil
  
  You'll develop your Gaelic grammar, syntax, vocabulary and idiom. The emphasis will be on pronunciation and oral communication skills. 
 
 Gaelic 2: Leasachadh conaltraidh
  
  You'll further develop your grammar skills, build vocabulary and idiom.   You'll build communicative competence, with an emphasis on reading, writing and spelling. All conventions needed by classroom teachers. 
 
 Gaelic 3: Comasan conaltraidh adhartach
  
  You'll focus on advanced oral presentation, writing and translation skills and linguistic analysis. This is content-based learning with an emphasis on topics to support practical classroom situations. Student-led discussion, project-work and self-study are prominent in this module. 
 
 Pedagogy 1: Language learning and teaching
  
  You'll addresses current theories, policies and practices relating to language learning and teaching. Particularly those concerned with language immersion settings. 
  You'll learn the confidence and skills to progress and support children's competence in Gaelic. This is for the relevant stages between the ages of 3 and 18. You'll start to develop the ability to discuss these matters in Gaelic. 
 
 Pedagogy 2: Gaelic medium education: policy, provision, practice
  
  You'll learn about GME provision, policy and practice. You'll develop a critical perspective on ways in which they can contribute to the goals of this sector. 
  This supports your competence and confidence to discuss these matters in Gaelic. 
 
 Pedagogy 3: Understanding, supporting and promoting bilingualism
  
  You'll focus on bilingual learners and the role GME plays in developing their competence in both Gaelic and in English. 
  It promotes critical perspectives on the implementation of the principles of bilingual education. You'll have the knowledge and linguistic skills to discuss these matters in Gaelic. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 You're expected to attend classes four days a week with one day a week allocated to independent study. This is due to the focus on language training and because most of the content is delivered in Gaelic. 
 Language learning teaching includes a focus on: 
  
  grammar 
  pronunciation 
  oral presentation 
  listening comprehension 
  literacy 
  
 You're encouraged to put your language skills to use in a variety of contexts including: 
  
  social and professional encounters 
  development of teaching resources 
  blogs 
  webpages 
  use of social media 
  networking events etc 
  
 Pedagogical learning and teaching includes: 
  
  lectures 
  seminars 
  workshops, 
  opportunities for microteaching 
  participation in professional development events for GME 
  
 You'll develop professional networks which you'll maintain after you have completed the course. 
 Guest lectures 
 
  There are lectures from experts in GME and related areas scheduled throughout the year. The majority of these are in Gaelic. You’ll get perspectives on policy, provision and practice in this sector and hear a range of Gaelic voices.
  
 