Course content 
 Semester 1 
 Compulsory classes 
 Sources, Skills & Methods for Historians 1
  
   
 
  
   
   You'll be introduced to methodological and practical issues in historical research.   
   
  
 
   
  
 Elective classes 
 Pharmaceuticals, Ethics and Health: 1800-1980
  
  This class analyses core debates in the History of Pharmaceutical Science and the History of the Pharmaceutical Industry. 
  It uses a series of cases studies including: the establishment of pharmacology as a medical science, standardisation and the quality of medications, the globalisation of the medicinal market, pharmaceutical legislation, drug scandals and the politics of pharmaceutics. 
  Through analysis of the historiography and primary materials, students will engage with the ethical debates which have accompanied the rise of the pharmaceutical industry as a global giant. 
 
 Health & Healthcare in the Long Nineteenth Century
 
   With a geographical focus on Britain and North America and thereby a consciously comparative approach, this class examines issues like the often vexed relationship between medicine, the public, and the state in an era which saw the constant redrawing of such boundaries in both nations. 
 
 The Politics of Health in Twentieth Century Britain
  
  This class analyses how healthcare policy and practice in Britain was formulated and contested amongst healthcare professionals, patients, pressure groups and the state over the course of the twentieth century. 
  It explores the ideological motivations underpinning health interventions and health activism against the backdrop of war, politics, changing economic fortunes and shifting social and cultural values. 
 
 Governing Highs & Heath: History & the Control of Intoxicants, c.1800-1945
  
  This class examines key moments in the development of modern systems of regulating drugs. 
  With a focus on western countries since 1800, it explores the political, social and economic contexts of decisions to control and restrict the consumption of both psychoactive and pharmaceutical products. 
  The objective is to place state enquiries, legislative projects and international agencies in historical context. 
 
 Semester 2 
 Compulsory classes 
 Sources, Skills & Methods for Historians 2
  
   
 
  
   
     A continuation of your introduction to methodological and practical issues in historical research.   
   
  
 
   
  
 Elective classes 
 Work and Occupational Health in the 20th Century: Comparative Perspectives
  
  The history of occupational health is a vibrant field of investigation on both sides of the Atlantic. 
  This class critically examines the impact of work on health, covering the 19th century roots of the problem to the end of the 20th century. 
  The main focus is on the British experience. However, this is compared and contrasted with the situation in mainland Europe and North America. 
 
 Child Health and Industrialisation, c.1750-1870
  
  This class examines the ailments, accidents and treatment experienced by working children and adolescents during the transition to an industrial society. 
  It focuses primarily on the textiles and mining industries and stresses the importance of relationships between the social structure, political economy, welfare provision and the family. 
 
 Medicine and Warfare, 1800-2000 
  
  This class analyses the role of medicine in the emergence of ‘modern’ forms of warfare, particularly the vital contribution that medicine made to manpower economy, discipline and morale. 
  It explores the ways that different countries have responded to the medical issues posed by modern warfare, the key objective being to place these military-medical developments within wider social, cultural and political contexts. 
 
 Food and Health in the West during the Twentieth Century 
  
  The aim of this class is for students to explore how dietary influences on health have been perceived in the West during the twentieth century. 
  Nutrition has been and continues to be one of the most controversial areas of health and medicine and one of the goals of this module is to examine why this has been the case. 
 
 MSc 
 If you progress to MSc level, you'll also write a 10,000 word dissertation. 
 Dissertation
  
  You’ll research a topic of your choice, under the supervision of a member of the programme staff. You’ll be able to use the extensive archive holdings relating to the history of medicine and of health and healthcare available in Glasgow and elsewhere in Central Scotland. 
  
 