Course content 
 Research Methods 
 Qualitative Analyses
 
   You'll be taught the underlying philosophy of using qualitative methods as well as a focus on Conversation Analysis and Discourse and you'll achieve practical competencies in the analysis of transcribed data. 
 
 Quantitative Analyses
 
   This class aims to provide advanced training in quantitative statistics which is commensurate with statistical knowledge commonly acquired on other psychology programmes at this level. For example, advanced ANOVA, multiple regression, and meta-analysis. SPSS is the software package used on the course. 
 
 Common Experimental Methods
 
   The Theories of Mind and Body class offers a biopsychosocial perspective on health and illness. As a consequence, biological, social and psychological approaches to health and illness will be examined. Theoretical models of health and illness behaviour and psychological wellbeing will be covered. 
 
 Applied Topics
 
 These three classes cover theoretical issues and practical skills relevant to medical conditions from a clinical, health and neuropsychological perspective.
  
 Health Psychology 
  
  This class will address the determinants of key health and illness behaviours, e.g. smoking, diet, physical activity, alcohol, screening, and adherence. 
  The role of health psychology in health conditions of significant public health importance will be studied, e.g. cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes and musculoskeletal conditions. 
  Workshops will address topics such as measuring health, motivational interviewing, intervention development and behaviour change techniques. 
 
 Clinical Psychology
  
  This class will provide you with a rigorous theoretical and evidenced-based introduction to using psychological therapies for medically related disorders with a primary focus on cognitive-behavioural therapy. 
  It offers specialised training and education in the assessment and management of co-morbid psychological conditions associated with medical disorders (specifically long-term conditions and medically unexplained symptoms). 
  The class will focus heavily on teaching experiential clinical skills which is unique for this type of non-clinical academic programme but which will prepare you for a career in Applied Psychology. 
 
 Neuropsychology
  
  This class offers knowledge and training in neuropsychology. it will focus in particular on identifying impairment using neuropsychological assessment, on diagnosis and on monitoring. 
  You'll gain knowledge and skills relating to neuropsychological assessment across a range of medical conditions. Advanced neuroimaging techniques will also be covered which can help further our understanding of neurological/psychiatric disorders. 
  The neuropathology, neuroanatomical and functional variations, and cognitive and behavioural symptoms of a variety of medical conditions will be included. 
 
 Professional Practice & Placement
 
 This module provides you with the professional skills required in a workplace setting. You’ll complete a project linked to a real-world issue in a specific applied setting e.g. a pain clinic.
  
 Professional Practice & Placement
  
  This class will provide you with an evidenced-based introduction to core professional issues, ethics, as well as an introduction to the communication skills required to practice effectively in an applied setting. 
  The aim of the class is to enable you to experience the practical application of psychology and the demands of working within an applied setting and within multidisciplinary working environments. It will also require you to work to the professional and ethical standards specified by the British Psychological Society and The Health Care and Professions Council. 
  The class will allow you to take a specific problem identified by the organisation, develop a solution, implement that solution and evaluate its efficacy. Methods will include: 
   
   audit and feedback 
   training programmes 
   developing psychological interventions 
   
 
 Dissertation
  
  The dissertation is designed to enable you to apply their knowledge and skills to the development and implementation of a research project. 
  The class will offer a portfolio of dissertation formats. You can opt to undertake an individual academic research project in any of the three core topic areas: 
   
   clinical 
   health 
   neuropsychology 
   
  The dissertation can involve any method relevant to the aims of the project, which is suitable for publication in an appropriate journal. In addition, a consultancy model will also be available. The consultancy model will provide you with an opportunity to work on a project for an external partner. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is delivered through seminars, workshops, practical training sessions and practical labs. Specialist guest lectures from external speakers are also included in the curriculum. 
 The placement enables you to experience an applied work setting and to begin to build your own independent professional networks. 
 