Course content 
 For more detailed information about each module please read our leaflet. 
 Compulsory modules
 Semester 1 
 Climate Change & International Law (taught)
  
  This class explores the complexity of the international climate change legal framework from its origins to the latest developments. Particular attention is given to how international law is developed and implemented in the field of climate change. 
  Class co-ordinator - Francesco Sindico 
 
 Comparative Climate Change Law (taught)
  
  The class provides you with an in depth discussion of: 
   
   the different nature of domestic climate policies (binding vs voluntary) 
   the sectorial focus of different national climate legislative packages 
   the range of possible measures that climate laws can take in different countries (command and control vs market-based mechanisms) 
   
  This will be done using selected domestic and regional climate legislative packages as key examples, such as climate laws from countries and regional groupings including the European Union, the United States of America, China and others. 
  Class co-ordinator - Francesco Sindico 
 
 Elective modules
 Semester 2 
 Equity & Adaptation (taught)
  
  In this module you’ll examine the equity and justice dilemmas highlighted by international climate policy. You’ll also learn about the specific legal and regulatory challenges raised by the issue of adaptation to climate change. 
  Class co-ordinator: Dr Harro Van Asselt 
 
 Carbon Markets & Climate Finance (taught)
  
  In this module you’ll learn about the theoretical background and current status of carbon markets and climate finance, and address the specific legal and regulatory dimensions. You'll also have the opportunity to engage in practical exercises such as the design of an emissions trading transaction. 
  Class co-ordinator: Mr Michael Mehling 
 
 Forests Land Use & Climate Change (taught)
  
  In this module you’ll learn about the regulation of LULUCF activities in Annex I countries and the emerging framework for REDD+ inside and outside the UNFCCC.   You'll also look at the existing and potential links of forest-related emission reduction activities to carbon markets, human rights instruments and instruments to conserve biological diversity. 
  Class co-ordinator: Prof Christina Voigt 
 
 Sustainable Energy Governance (taught)
  
  This class examines the particular challenges of ensuring sustainable governance of energy markets. The focus is on the legal and regulatory mechanisms available to support clean energy production, the efficient use of energy, and sustainable network development. 
  The class will draw upon a range of comparative material for illustrative purposes, but with particular emphasis on energy law and policy in the European Union and its member states. 
  Class co-ordinator: Prof Aileen McHarg 
 
 Climate Change & Litigation (online)
  
  This on-line class will explore the reasons behind the emergence of climate change litigation and the efficacy of litigation in moving forward climate change policies. It will then highlight the key challenges that any climate change case will present from a legal perspective. 
  Finally, the module will discuss the possible judicial fora and grounds on which a climate change case could be based. 
  Class co-ordinator: Prof Mark Poustie 
 
 Climate Law & the Global Economy (online)
  
  This on-line class will focus on the relationship between international and domestic climate laws and policies with the international economic legal order, i.e. the international trade and international investment regimes. 
  This discussion will take place in the wider context of how and whether climate laws and policies can play a positive role in moving the international community towards a low carbon society. 
  Class co-ordinator - Francesco Sindico 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The LLM is delivered through a combination of distance learning using the University’s virtual learning environment and two compulsory weeks of seminar-based learning. 
    
 Each module can also be taken as a specialised course. 
 Residential weeks for the 2015/16 cohort will take place on: 
  
  14 to 19 September 2015 (core classes) 
  11 to 16 January 2016 (elective classes)﻿ 
  
 September 2015 
 You’ll attend an intensive one-week long (Monday to Saturday) residential session where you’ll follow two core modules: 
  
  Climate Change & International Law 
  Comparative Climate Change Law 
  
 September to December 2015 
 You’ll work from home on the assignments for the two above-mentioned modules and on a third core module - Research Methods & Skills. 
 January 2016 
 You’ll attend a second intensive one-week long residential session where you’ll follow two elective modules from: 
  
  Equity & Adaptation or Carbon Markets & Climate Finance 
  Forests, Land Use & Climate Change or Sustainable Energy Governance 
  
 January to May 2016 
 You’ll follow a third module chosen between Climate Change & Litigation and Climate Law & the Global Economy. Both are delivered entirely online. You’ll also work from home on the assignments for the two above-mentioned elective modules and the third online elective module. 
 May 2016 to September 2016 
 You’ll work on a dissertation, provided you’ve passed the necessary credits. 
 October 2016 
 If you’ve accrued the necessary amount of credits, you’ll be awarded the LLM in Climate Change Law & Policy 
 