Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Strategic Supply Chain Management
 
   This class aims to provide you with a critical understanding of the fundamental building blocks of Supply Chain Management and e-Supply Chains from a Strategic perspective. This is with a view to developing your capabilities in modelling, analysing, diagnosing and re-designing/improving supply chains. 
 
 Supply Chain Operations
  
  The class aims to provide you with an in-depth knowledge and understanding of those key concepts, methods, tools and techniques that are fundamental to effective and efficient running of supply chain operations from suppliers’ suppliers to customers’ customers. 
  On completion you'll be able to design and manage operational supply chain planning, monitoring and control systems for complex and disparate operations. 
 
 Enterprise Resource Planning
 
   To develop a critical understanding of operation, structure and implementation issues around ERP systems as used in industry. 
 
 Postgraduate Individual Project
 
   The aim of the individual project is to allow you to combine the skills learned in other classes and apply them within a significant project in a specific area of design, manufacture, or engineering management. This will be achieved through you carrying out work into a particular topic relating to their course and preparing a dissertation that documents the project. 
 
 Management Of Total Quality & Continuous Improvement
 
   To provide you with an in-depth understanding of the main principles, concepts, tools and techniques of quality management and continuous improvement together with an awareness of how in practice these could be integrated to design and deliver an integrated continuous improvement programme.
  
  This class is run as a self-directed learning module where the formal lectures are replaced by comprehensive e-learning materials and a detailed learning programme. The learning is supported through comprehensive tutorials. 
 
 Product Costing & Financial Management
 
   This class aims to provide you with an understanding of strategic aspects of finance in relation to the decision-making process and analysis necessary for efficient management of supply chains. 
 
 Advanced Project Management
  
 
 Business Operations & Supply Chain Strategy
  
 
 Case Studies In Supply Chain Management
  
 
 Specialism 
 Logistics
 
   This class aims to investigate the operational structures and characteristics of international logistics and distribution chains. The role of multimodal transport systems in providing international logistics solutions is emphasised. 
 
 Spreadsheet Modelling & Demand Forecasting
 
   Spreadsheets provide an easily accessible tool to support business modelling and analysis. Spreadsheets are a popular modelling support tool because they facilitate easy manipulation of data and thus greatly reduce the time necessary to set-up and modify models. Analysis carried out in a spreadsheet is easily transferred into other software packages or presented visually, so that it provides a good platform for report writing.
  
  This class will demonstrate how spreadsheets can be used to support the analytical techniques whose theory is taught on other modules, for example, forecasting, simulation, optimisation, data analysis, as well as being used to support technical report writing. Most prominence is given to demand forecasting and you'll be introduced to different types of forecasting technique for short term smoothing through to decompositional analysis. These methods will be implemented using spreadsheet models. This class also extends the basics of using a spreadsheet to explore the principles of effective computer programming through the development of macros to automate the functionality available within spreadsheets. 
 
 Elective classes 
 People, Organisation & Technology
 
   This class aims to introduce you to the “softer” aspects of change management. In other classes you will have learned how to identify areas for improvement in organisations, tools and techniques to model organisations and to implement change. This class complements these things and looks at the human implications of change. 
 
 Systems Thinking & Modelling
 
   The objective of this class is to introduce you to the theories and principles behind systems thinking. The class will also introduce you to the methods, tools and techniques for modelling, analysing, improving and designing systems in a variety of organisations, including industrial, commercial and public sector. 
 
 Quantitative Business Analysis
  
  The analysis of data and development of empirical models plays a vital role in business analysis and operational research. This class   will provide a basis for you to learn a range of widely used methods ranging from effective presentation of data to development of sophisticated statistical models.Quantitative Business Analysis runs over one semester but in two parts. The first part provides an introduction to the basic theory and application of statistical modelling. Topics covered include: 
   
   data analysis 
   probability theory 
   distributions and moments 
   estimation 
   hypothesis testing 
   
  The second part focuses mainly on two areas - regression modelling and multivariate analysis. 
  While key background theory will be presented, the emphasis is on the generation and interpretation of output from commercially available software. Throughout, there is an emphasis on the use of statistical analysis to help support decision-making and the management of business and industrial problems. Cases are used to illustrate topical issues. 
 
 Risk Analysis & Management
 
   Risk analysis plays an important role in most business operations. This class is concerned with assessment and measurement of risk, and with the development of risk mitigation strategies that address stakeholder concerns.
  
  Through this class we will explore the entire process of structuring a risk problem, modelling it, supporting and communicating recommendations, both theoretically and in practice. Risk management is linked with decision analysis in so far as we explore decision making under uncertainty and it has links with quantitative business analysis as we explore the use of statistics in understanding risk. However, the topic has some unique attributes such as risk communication and the role that experts play in risk assessment. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 This course is delivered through a balanced mix of lectures, tutorials and project works. Industrial contacts are regularly invited to present based on their experience. 
 