Course content 
 This course offers teachers and high achieving BACP graduates the chance to specialise further in their field and best meet the needs of children in nursery and early primary school. 
 The certificate explores contemporary and historical perspectives in relation to what matters in early education and how these relate to early years practice. 
 The diploma looks in depth at how children learn from pre-birth and ways that teachers can use their knowledge of children as learners, the wider life of families and communities to lead pedagogy and work alongside stakeholders to develop learning. 
 Postgraduate Certificate classes 
 Taking Action: Child, Family & Community Efficacy
 
   Currently, the shaping of childhood is strongly influenced by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. It has potential tensions between child protection and empowerment or efficacy as exemplified in ‘a risk-averse society’. This class asks you to critically analyse the perceptions around childhood including the changing historical perceptions. 
 
 Creating Stimulating Learning Environments: Indoors & Out
 
   Children's learning environments need to stimulate and engage them and provide the challenges and opportunities to explore their own learning possibilities. You'll be asked to analyse and reflect on your current practice, the importance of play and the role of adults in supporting a child’s use of play. 
 
 Listening to Children & Hearing their Voices
  
  This class will provide opportunities for you to explore and discuss current international examples of practice. This includes Reggio Emilia and Te Whariki and will consider the ways in which children communicate their interests and thinking through gestures, expressions, actions, interactions and play activities. 
  It will promote your understanding of the importance of listening to children and the concept of children as active agents in their own learning and development. 
 
 Postgraduate Diploma classes
 
 
  Following successful completion of the certificate, you can continue to diploma study. The award of an Early Years Pedagogue (EYP) Diploma requires completion of three further modules.   You can choose three modules from the EYP programme or two modules from EYP and one from another modular Masters course.
 
  
 The Connected Child: Early Child Development
  
  You'll consider ways to promote children's social and emotional well-being and the strategies they must develop to implement evidence based interventions which provide universal and targeted support. 
  In addition, you'll be required to relate theory to practice and critically evaluate and assess current approaches which address the social context of children’s development. 
 
 Leading in a Time of Change
 
   The quality of leadership in childhood and care services determines the quality of care children experience and can significantly affect their development and learning. This class takes into account your needs and different levels of experience. It encourages you to explore the links between the key theories of management and leadership and your own professional development. 
 
 Child-Centred & Child-Focused Approaches to Practitioner Research
  
  This class offers you the opportunity to pursue relevant and specific interests through a detailed proposal for a small-scale independent research project, and to work with child-centred and child focused methodologies. 
  The Early Years practitioner must be able to apply these skills and consider, evaluate and weigh various pieces of data and information to make informed judgement about changes in their practice. It aims to develop your inquiring mind in order to support effective child-centred and child-focused practitioner research. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 You'll attend a two-day induction course on campus, followed by a trial week before the start Module 1. 
 The rest of the course is delivered through the web using the University’s online learning platform.   You’ll have a weekly student-tutor chat session. You’ll also have the opportunity to work collaboratively on weekly tasks within a virtual learning environment. The course will have a password-protected site accessible to tutors and students and our web developer only. 
 