Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Generic Biomedical & Pharmaceutical Research Skills
  
  To illustrate the many sources of scientific information available electronically, how to construct effective search protocols to find relevant information and present it using graphical means and oral presentations. 
  To enable you to understand, choose and use appropriate statistical methods to aid collection and interpretation of data in the biomedical and pharmaceutical sciences and associated industries. 
  To encourage you to engage in debate on: 
   
   scientific hypotheses 
   regulatory affairs & research funding 
   in vivo experimentation 
   human stem cell therapies 
   
  To introduce the concepts of: 
   
   skills evaluation and personal effectiveness 
   time management, planning and Gannt charts 
   decision-making processes and review 
   information and data management 
   good laboratory practice 
   peer interaction, communication and networking 
   preparing a CV, career planning and applying for future positions 
   
 
 Industrial Pharmacy
 
   The aim of the class is to give advanced information on standard organics with highlighting the challenges on Biopharmaceuticals aspects in relation to drug development. 
 
 Process Analytical Technology & Quality by Design in Continuous Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
  
 
 Continuous Manufacturing of Pharmaceutical Particles & Products
 
   This class aims to provide you with direct experience of continuous crystallisation and downstream processes. You'll have the opportunity to apply the underpinning knowledge gained from proceeding classes to manufacture a pharmaceutical product using continuous processes. 
 
 Crystallisation & Formulation for Manufacture
 
   The aim is to provide academic and practical training in drug and fine chemical crystallisation principles and the subsequent formulation and processing requirements to produce medicinal and consumer products. 
 
 Pharmaceutical Project Management
 
   The aim of this class is to impart knowledge and understanding of the Pharmaceutical Project management keeping in view of pharmaceutical, biotech and industry in mind. 
  
 MSc only 
 Continuous Manufacturing Research Project
 
   You'll undertake an assignment usually in one of the continuous manufacturing and crystallisation research laboratories where they undertake a project and prepare a thesis for assessment. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 Theory and applications are taught through lectures, tutorials, seminars and web-based learning. Class material is available through an online learning tool which you can access at any time. 
 You’ll also take part in practical sessions which provide you with experience of a wide range of modern instrumental and state-of-the-art techniques. 
 