Course content 
 Instructional classes 
 Inspection & Survey 
  
  This class provides you with an insight into 'marine' materials, their properties, failure and protection and an understanding of how defects and degradation affect the life-cycle of marine and offshore structures. 
  Particular emphasis is on corrosion, fatigue and fracture of steel and the corrosion properties of high strength and stainless alloy streels. 
 
 Offshore Engineering Practice 
  
  This class aims to provide an overview of offshore hydrocarbon production processes. The emphasis is on the technical developments, particularly in the last 20 years. 
  It also aims to provide in-depth understanding of some selected technical aspects through a series of seminars delivered by practicing experts from the industry. 
 
 Risers & Mooring Lines
  
  This class aims to provide an overview of the current deepwater oil and gas developments around the world and the technical challenges in terms of riser and mooring line design. It will also demonstrate methods for modelling and analysing risers and mooring lines. 
 
 Subsurface Technology 
  
  This class aims to: 
   
   introduce the basic engineering principles of drilling for hydrocarbons in on and off-shore locations 
   provide knowledge of drilling systems 
   develop skills in order to design a drill string 
   predict the power requirements for hoisting systems and the circulation of drilling fluid 
   gain knowledge of CO2 capture, transport and geological storage 
   
 
 Marine Pipelines 
  
  This class aims to provide you with an in-depth insight into marine pipelines with emphasis on: 
   
   the overall design process 
   pipeline hydraulics analysis 
   installation methods 
   environmental loading and stability 
   materials selection and corrosion prevention 
   
 
 Maritime Safety & Risk
  
  This class aims to enhance the conceptual understanding on safety and risk in the maritime context. It will also provide state-of-the-art knowledge, tools and techniques to enable practicing professionals in marine technology sector to deal with marine safety as a life-cycle issue, cost effectively. 
 
 Subsea Systems & Installation
  
  This class provides a detailed overview of subsea systems and installation ranging from basic definitions of hardware, configuration and production control to selection, design, and installation in shallow and deep waters. 
  
 In addition choose one of the following: 
 Dynamics of Floating Offshore Installations 
  
  This class aims to provide knowledge in order to understand the factors influencing the dynamic behaviour of fixed and floating offshore structures due to environmental forces. 
  It also aims to develop skills in order to predict the dynamic motion and structural response of fixed and floating offshore platforms and to design and analyse foundations for fixed offshore structures. 
 
 Theory & Practice of Marine Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) 
  
  This class aims to: 
   
   introduce you to the theoretical background of marine CFD using the finite volume method 
   illustrate the key ides related to discretisation and solution of the Navier-Stokes equations for incompressible flows 
   discuss some practical issues related to the use of CFD packages in marine applications 
   
 
 Computational Free Surface Hydrodynamics 
  
  This module will help you learn how to model turbulent flows and free surface flows by Computational Fluid Dynamics method. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 There are two teaching periods (semesters) of 12 weeks each. Some of the second semester subjects are taught over eight weeks. This is so that you can devote as much time as possible to your individual project work. 
 Course modules are delivered in form of formal lectures supported with tutorials and laboratory experiment. 
 You’re required to attend an induction prior to the start of the course.﻿ 
 Guest lectures 
 During term time, we arrange weekly seminars in which leaders and pioneers of the maritime, oil and gas and marine renewables industries visit the department and present to students. This is a great way of supplementing your education with the latest developments and gaining industry contacts for your future career. 
 Industrial visits are also made to a variety of companies. 
 