Course content 
 Postgraduate Diploma 
 Compulsory classes 
 Multimedia Journalism
  
  This class introduces you to the professional demands of multimedia journalism, equipping you with the techniques needed to create effective digital packages. 
  You'll learn about: 
   
   news values 
   generating ideas and sources 
   online research techniques 
   interviewing 
   mobile media 
   creating news 
   features 
   live blogs 
   interactivity 
   digital story-telling techniques 
   audio/video recording and editing 
   
 
 Entrepreneurial Journalism
  
  This class is a collaboration with the prestigious Hunter Centre for Entrepreneurship, part of the globally renowned Strathclyde Business School. 
  It aims to increase your employability by allowing you to develop your entrepreneurial ideas in a risk free environment and learn about generating ideas, business planning, funding, developing a portfolio career and personal branding. 
  You'll also participate in an intensive week of workshops on creating new ventures. 
 
 Producing Media
  
  This class enables you to develop a critical understanding of digital journalism production processes by working in a simulated news room over several weeks. 
  As a team you devise, launch and produce your own online publication and create a social media strategy to market it. 
  You'll gain direct experience of multimedia news operation through generating ideas, undertaking editorial planning, preparing content, and designing and editing pages.   
 
 Scots Law for Journalists
  
  Most journalists are expected to demonstrate a detailed awareness of the journalist’s rights and responsibilities in their reporting. 
  You'll learn about: 
   
   the Scottish legal system 
   court structures and procedures 
   defamation 
   contempt of court 
   legal restrictions on reporting courts, parliament and government 
   copyright 
   confidence and privacy including human rights legislation and media regulatory systems 
   
 
 Media Ethics
  
  This class gives you an understanding of key ethical issues in professional journalism, developing skills in recognising and solving ethical problems. 
  You'll learn about a journalist’s ethical responsibilities to their employer, target audience and the wider community.    
  It'll enable you to analyse and critique key debates, apply appropriate ethical concepts, and develop an awareness of the professional choices that journalists face. 
  
 Elective classes 
 Investigative Journalism: History & Theory
  
  Investigative journalism has a history as a genre. This class traces that history from the late nineteenth century to the present day. 
  It compares the genre in the US with that in the UK. You learn to distinguish different kinds of investigative journalism and by the end of the class you should be able to undertake your own investigative project. 
 
 Journalism & Society
  
  This class bridges theory and practice by considering journalism’s social obligations and responsibilities and its institutional contexts. 
  On completion you should: 
   
   understand the UK’s contemporary journalistic environment 
   be aware of key debates around factuality, impartiality, objectivity and news values 
   recognise different genres and styles of journalism 
   have developed a reflexive approach to your own work 
   
 
 MLitt
 If you progress to the MLitt, you'll choose to undertake either an academic dissertation or a production dissertation. 
 Academic Dissertation
  
  This allows you to explore a journalism studies topic at length through robust research methods and analysis. 
  Suitable subjects include: 
   
   journalism ethics 
   the media’s institutional and financial frameworks 
   the practice of journalism including textual usage, social media and media effects 
   journalism’s social context 
   
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is delivered by lectures and seminars, during which a range of teaching and learning strategies are used. 
 These include formal talks, discussions, presentations, role-playing exercises and discussion of recorded material. 
 You'll also pursue real-life stories, produce your own journalism packages and experiment with entrepreneurial projects in extended workshops. You'll devise, launch and produce your own online publications predominantly through independent learning. 
 Guest lectures 
 We've a programme of visiting speakers including: 
  
  Calum Macdonald- Herald digital editor 
  Matt Roper- STV online editor 
  
 The Literary Lunch series is run by our own Literary Fellow, Keith Wright. The series showcases the best in Scottish writing and features poets and novelists such as Liz Lochhead, James Robertson and Andrew Greig. 
 