Course content 
 Course Structure 
 You'll take 210 credits made up of 120 credit taught modules, 30 credits industrial placement and 60 credits dissertation. The 18 months full-time MSc course spans three semesters as follows: 
  
  Semester 1 – Year 1, January to May - 50 credits of taught classes 
  Industrial placement – Year 1, June to September - 30 credits 
  Semester 2 – Year 1, October to December - First half of design project class and 30 credits of taught classes 
  Semester 3 – Year 2, January to June - Second half of design project class and a 60 credit dissertation 
  
 Compulsory classes 
 Civil Engineering Design Projects
  
  This module includes a choice between two projects: a renewable energy project or an industrial port project. If you intend to take the industrial port project it’s advised that you also take the Structural Design option module CL977 in Semester 1. 
 
 Research Protocols for Science & Engineering
  
  This class gives you the opportunity to obtain the skills necessary to plan, execute and complete a research programme. You’ll develop research skills so that you can undertake dissertations independently. You’ll be able to analyse and assess the findings critically in order to produce accurate and meaningful outputs and outcomes of research. You’re required to present you research and demonstrate the necessary skills required for both oral and poster presentations along with relevant University regulations. 
 
 Industrial placement
  
  Graduates increasingly need highly developed transferable professional skills to prepare for and to gain future employment. This class allows you to carry out placements and projects with industry to develop and refine professional skills while gaining credits in the process. 
 
 Elective classes
 
 Choose four from List A and three from List A or B
  
 List A 
 Ground Improvement and Reinforcement
  
  This class covers the principles and techniques of ground improvement and soil reinforcement. You’ll apply the appropriate design methods in various ground conditions including the use of computer-aided design. 
 
 Site Investigation and Risk 