Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Air Pollution, Climate Change & Human Health
  
  This class provides you with knowledge and skills related to atmospheric pollution impacts, ranging from local to global scales. 
  This includes a focus on the assessment & management of impacts on human health through interface between the public health sciences of environmental epidemiology and environmental toxicology; and environmental engineering approaches to manage environmental risks. 
 
 Contaminated Land Management
  
  Within the background of land redevelopment (residential, industrial/commercial and gardens/parks), this class aims to provide insights into the remediation of contaminated land, including the regulatory framework and risk assessment, sampling & analysis, and various remedial techniques for contaminated land. 
 
 Food Inspection & Control 
  
  The aim of this class is to give you an understanding of the need for, and the principles and methods of, food inspection and control. Learning is focussed on the emphasis to safeguard public health, for example through food inspections and audits, and environmental issues including food packaging. 
 
 Food Safety & Hygiene 
 
   This class aims to provide an understanding of the current food enforcement bodies, the national and European food laws and their enforcement power and procedures. The main focus is to ensure that you learn the general and specific food legislation and requirement for the protection of public health. 
 
 Occupational Health & Toxicology 
 
   This class provides you with an understanding of the influence of the workplace environment on human health, in addition to introducing hazard analysis & risk assessment in relation to workplace exposures. It also provides an introduction to toxicological sciences covering basic principles of toxicology and the mechanisms by which environmental contaminants affect human beings. 
 
 Public Health Studies 
 
   This class develops students’ understanding of public and environmental health, and the multidisciplinary approach in preventative and proactive action to safeguarding public health. A diverse range of subjects are covered ranging from the risk assessment approach taken with respect to protecting the public from private water supplies, to the role of environmental health professionals in the prevention of the spread of infectious disease. The class also provides students with fundamental knowledge regarding Health Improvement/Promotion and Health Protection, including the different methods used and the variety of agencies involved. 
 
 Waste Management & Landfill Design
 
   This class covers organisational and regulatory aspects of waste management practice in the UK: legislation, composition of domestic and industrial wastes, storage, collection, reception, and disposal of solid wastes, clinical wastes, sewage sludge disposal, recycling and recovery. 
 
 Water & Environment Management 
 
   To develop an understanding of the physical, chemical and biological parameters within surface water and how these relate to water quality, water quality objectives and pollution control strategy. To provide knowledge on the design and process involved with the control of water and wastewater treatment. 
 
 Elective classes
 Choose four from the list. 
 Environmental Impact 