Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Education & Lifelong Learning: International Perspective
  
  This class will provide an introduction  to adult education and lifelong learning  and the theoretical and policy debates  at national and international level. It  will have a European focus, looking  at policies and practices and how they  have developed in the international arena. You'll  investigate area of their  interest and link this to life and work  contexts. 
 
 Innovations in Lifelong Learning
  
  We'll look at the role and importance of community learning and its role and importance in local and regional development. Issues to be examined will include: 
   
   access to education 
   the role of community learning in development 
   gender 
   ethnicity 
   adult literacy. 
   A particular emphasis will be placed on technology and the developing role it plays in widening access to learning and developing communities.
   
 
 Technology Enhanced Learning – Theory & Practice
  
  The class will provide you with the main theoretical principles underpinning practice in the field of Technology Enhanced Learning, providing hands-on experience with the latest relevant technologies and associated skills. 
  The class is delivered in blended learning. 
 
 Online Communities & Networks for Lifelong Learning
  
  You'll be introduced to the participatory culture of the web and the potential it presents in cultivating learning networks, learning in communities of interest and practice and in pursuing lifelong learning opportunities suitable to harness the needs of the digital economy. 
  This class is delivered online. 
 
 Digital Literacies: Living, Working and Learning in the Network Society
  
  We aim to enhance your digital literacies by engaging you critically and in a practical way with contemporary topics and practices related to the demands of our changing society and the challenges posed by technological advances, such as the social web. 
  The class is delivered online. 
 
 Curriculum Innovation with Technology: Designing for Context 
  
  You'll be taught the main theoretical principles underpinning learning design with technology. The class will focus on concepts such as: 
   
   responsive and flexible curriculum design 
   authentic learning and authentic assessment 
   new forms of accreditation 
   the combination of neuroscience and Technology Enhanced Learning 
   
  The class is delivered online. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is offered on a part-time basis and﻿ offers different modes of delivery from traditional face-to-face seminars to online, round table discussions. The course aims to promote interactive learning and harness the latest web technologies so that you're able to put your theoretical knowledge to practice. 
 Guest lectures 
 There'll be guest online lectures by academics from other institutions and practitioners whose work focuses on the topics explored in class, for example digital citizenship and online identity. 
 