Course content 
 The programme is centred on three core modules: 
  
  project management 
  innovation and technology management 
  management skills 
  
 These are designed to develop and enhance the knowledge and skills critical for our graduates' future careers in project management and innovation. We place great emphasis on your ability to work effectively in complex, dynamic and uncertain environments, and to recognise the challenges that these circumstances pose. 
 Our teaching and learning methods are designed so that you develop skills in recognition of challenges, opportunities and can develop strategies for change. Simultaneously, the project management in practice and personal development modules provide you with leadership, project management and professional communication skills that are essential for career progression into project leadership roles, as well as experience of working with clients, and putting theory into practice. You'll also be able to pursue your individual interests and further develop specialised skills relevant to your preferred career paths through a wide range of elective classes. 
 Semester 1 & 2 
 Professional Management Practice
  
  This class seeks, on the one hand, to focus on the development and refinement of managerial skills. On the other, it seeks to explore the complexities and ambiguities of contemporary organisational contexts. This class offers you, through a series of workshops, the opportunity to identify your development needs and refine your managerial skills. 
 
 Semester 1 
 Commercial Management in Projects
  
  This class defines the role of commercial management within project-oriented organisations, providing a framework for and helping to develop a critical understanding of the factors that influence commercial management practice. It also identifies generic aspects of this practice and provides a theoretical foundation to these activities, by reference to existing and emergent theories and concepts, as well as to relevant management best practice. 
 
 Technology & Organisational Change
  
  Drawing on a range of in-depth case studies, this class introduces you to fundamental questions and approaches to the study of technology and organisational change. Specifically, it'll explore how organisational structures enable and constrain the development of new technologies, and how new technologies enable changes in the process of organising. 
  The purpose of the course is to provide you with a thorough grounding in various perspectives on technology development and use combined with real cases of organisational change and transformation. 
 
 Leadership for Change & Innovation
  
  The central premise of this class is that whilst prudent management is essential, it is not sufficient to assure sustainable business success. Leadership in any sector involves using creativity and vision to tackle problems. This class draws together the latest theories and practices to develop skills and understanding for effective leadership in the context of change. It also informs the practices of leadership in innovative project teams. 
 
 Managerial Accounting
  
  This class develops your ability to understand the nature and limitations of the information provided in the external, and internal, financial reports. It introduces some of the accounting techniques underlying business activity, and builds your awareness of the financial implications of strategic and operational decisions. 
 
 Semester 2 
 Project & Programme Management
  
  This class introduces the tools and techniques used in project and programme management. It'll begin by introducing the methods used to define the scope of a project including the objectives it needs to achieve and the deliverables to be generated. It then goes on to examine lifecycle management, planning and scheduling techniques and cost control before finishing with risk management. 
  The theme of this class is to promote project performance not only in terms of meeting the time, cost and performance targets of each specific contract but also in relation to complementing the overall business strategy by exceeding customer expectations and therefore leveraging new business. 
 
 Business Operations
  
  The purpose of this class is to introduce the operations function, in service and manufacturing organisations, as the transformation of system inputs to value-added outputs and to address key aspects of design, planning and control of operations systems, and to provide an understanding of the operations function in a global context. 
 
 Project Portfolio Management
  
  In the current harsh and fast-changing competitive environment, organisations are becoming increasingly engaged with the management of a complex collective set of projects. Assembling a project portfolio management (PPM) system is a process that must be carefully and strategically devised, as well as frequently and regularly maintained and reviewed. 
  This is fundamental to ensure that the organisation supports those projects which provide the most appropriate match between its capabilities with the opportunities available. This class focuses on all key aspects of PPM ranging from selecting projects and facilitating their successful execution. 
 
 Semester 3 
 Project Methodology
  
  You'll be introduced to a range of different methodological approaches to conducting research and key issues researchers are commonly faced with (eg relevance of practitioner engagement, ethics). You'll be provided a broad overview of research choices and issues from the perspective of Strathclyde staff representing each department in the Business Faculty who will present vignettes from their own research projects. 
 
 Business Strategy
  
  This class provides opportunities to explore, understand and apply the language of strategy and strategic management. By examining real-life organisations, you'll develop your understanding of the forces within their contextual and transactional environments that influence their strategy, and by applying different strategic frameworks, develop the ability to critically analyse the strategic direction being adopted. 
 
 Managing Technology & Innovation 
  
  Innovation has become a core management capability for those organisations that want to succeed in today’s business climate. The course focuses on the management of technological innovation in contemporary business firms with a strong emphasis on the key role of people and organisations in creating, developing and transferring new knowledge, products, processes and services. 
  By drawing from the state-of-the-art innovation literature as well as a wealth of original, in-depth case study materials, the course analyses the opportunities and challenges related to creating, sustaining and managing innovation in the 21st century. 
 
 Consultancy in Practice
  
  As the final class in the degree programme, the Consultancy in Practice class is aimed at developing effective and reflective practitioners/managers. It provides students with the opportunity to deploy many aspects of their learning by engaging with a live issue provided by a client company. It commences with a review of key  theories and tools  that  students have studied as part of  their degree  with consideration given on how to use these in this exercise. 
  This is followed by analysis of material provided by the client which describes the issue to be addressed and the outcome expected by the client. This then leads into a group activity which applies particular techniques for addressing aspects of  the client’s issue. More detailed client input is provided  at certain points in  the process often through direct interface with the client. This  allows  students to gain a more in-depth understanding of the issue and  to try out various solutions. 
  Further analysis is carried out by the groups and the class concludes with students presenting their thinking to their client.  The client presentations are  then followed by a reflective session where the tutor, client and students are encouraged to explore the process of the class and develop the learning gained. 
 
 Electives
  
  In order to help you develop new skills and/or extend your knowledge in areas that you see as relevant to your personal learning objectives, students are asked to undertake two elective classes. These classes are chosen from a wide portfolio of elective subjects, which are revised annually to reflect the latest business thinking. In the past students have chosen from   classes including: 
   
   Brand Management & Strategy 
   Foundations of Risk﻿ 
   New Venture Creation 
   Programme & Project Management﻿ 
   Games of Strategy﻿ 
   Leadership﻿ 
   Strategic Financial Management﻿ 
   Management of International Relationships﻿ 
   Change Agency 
   Developing Skills for Effective Management Consulting﻿ 
   Social Media: Strategy & Management﻿ 
   Managing in Europe (Taught at Toulouse Business School, France)﻿ 
   
  A full list of the electives available in the 2015/2016 academic year will be announced during Semester 2.    
 
 Project
  
  The Project Management & Innovation project provides you with a valuable opportunity to apply what you have learned through the taught modules to a more practical situation. Working under the supervision of a member of our faculty, you'll spend time working individually, or in a group, on a topic of central interest in the area of project & innovation management. 
  You'll learn the skills needed to develop a proposal and conduct an effective enquiry into your topic area, producing a report that is both informed and practical. Project subject matters are diverse, with a vast array of industries and topics to consider. 
  While many projects can be subject specific, increasingly, many projects are undertaken with organisations, which allow you to learn more about a specific industry or work with a particular company. Our experience shows that such interactions often act as a catalyst for future career opportunities. While you'll be encouraged to put forward your own suggestion of a company, we do have client projects on offer, so are more than happy to assist you in identifying appropriate clients and partnerships.