Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Research Skills
  
  This course introduces core skills needed to obtain research funding and successfully manage the resulting research in both an academic and a commercial environment. 
 
 Project Training
  
  This course develops your transferable skills (communication skills, literature survey)﻿  in preparation for the project undertaken on the course. 
  It also helps you in developing an understanding of the management of projects in an industrial setting and preparation for successful working in technological industries. 
 
 Project
  
  You'll undertake a cutting edge research project in either one of the research groups of the Department of Physics or with collaborating departments and institutions (Chemistry, Institute of Photonics, Fraunhofer Centre for Applied Photonics, Electronic & Electrical Engineering, Centre for Biophotonics). 
 
 Topics in Photonics: Laser & Nonlinear Optics
  
  The course provides an introduction to laser physics, laser optics and nonlinear optics as required for the work in many photonic labs. 
 
 Device Microfabrication-Principle & Practice
  
  This course introduces the principles, facilities and processes for device fabrication and cleanroom operation underpinning modern semiconductor photonics and other optical technologies. 
 
 Photonics Materials & Devices (topics in solid state physics)
  
  The course provides an introduction into semiconductor physics, semiconductor electronics and semiconductor photonics with an outlook on micro and nano-structures and current hot topics. 
 
 Advanced Photonics Devices
  
  This introduces advanced photonics devices including their principles and applications (quantum confinement, waveguide optics, photonic and electronic bandgaps, photonic crystals). 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 In semesters 1 & 2, the course involves lectures, tutorials, assignments of various types, including a literature review, and workshops in which you'll gain presentation experience. 
 The three month project is based on practical laboratory work, supported by mentoring from the academic project supervisor and by training in practical skills by laboratory staff. 
 