Course content 
 Year 1 
 Compulsory classes 
 Design Studies 4A – To Care (Part 1)
 
   The first main studio project focuses on the design of a small but programmatically complex, multi-functional urban building. The design challenge includes site and programme appraisal, the generation and systematic testing, analysing and appraising of design options and the final design of a detailed and well executed building. 
 
 Design Studies 4B – To Care (Part 2)
 
   The second main studio project focuses on the design of a large and programmatically simple, multi-functional urban building to be set within a specific urban context, and developed to a detailed level sufficient to demonstrate the relationship between the overall architectural concept, spatial quality and related technical and environmental considerations. 
 
 Cultural Studies 4
 
   This class provides students with the opportunity to define, explore and articulate an area of investigation of their own interest in the production of an appropriately illustrated dissertation. You'll develop an argument and demonstrate a position using evidence from your research. 
  
 Elective classes 
 Special Study Project 4
 
   You'll choose from series of classes taught by staff and related to areas of expertise in the domains of media and technology, urban design, sustainability and ecology and collaborative design. 
 
 Year 2 
 Compulsory classes 
 Design Studies
 
   This class is organised within a meta-theme shared by the year, and developed within design units. Design Studies comprise two projects, Design Studies 5 A and 5B; the first consisting in the in-depth investigation, analysis and development of a design proposition, the latter in its detailed resolution. 
 
 Cultural Studies 5
  
  This class aims to consolidate and develop your knowledge in key thematic areas - contemporary architectural history and theory, urban design and culture, technology and environment and new forms of media and communication. It's organised around lectures and workshops to map out ideas, thinkers and projects from a variety of disciplines that have a direct bearing on the production and use of buildings and cities. 
  You're introduced to a field of knowledge that is drawn from the social sciences, architectural and construction history, political science, cultural studies, economic and critical theory. 
 
 Professional Studies 5
 
   This class aims to prepare you by developing your knowledge, skill and maturity to carry out, on qualification, their professional and architectural duties responsibly and effectively. It introduces you to issues of cost control mechanisms within the context of the architectural design and construction process, to business issues pertaining to running an architectural practice, to procurement methods and the administrative and contractual procedures involved in administering an architectural project. 
  
 Elective classes 
 Special Study Project 5
 Choose from this list based on your interests and to support your design thesis and Masters dissertation
  
 Expand AllCollapse All-->
  
 Experimental Media, Narrative & Film
 
   Students will learn about forms of architectural representation, the experimental use of traditional representational techniques and the innovative use of new multi and mixed media technologies. You'll then explore these to represent your ideas about architecture and the built environment through film and other image-sound-text based technologies. 
 
 The History & Theory of Architectural Conservation 
 
   You'll learn about the contextual conditions which generated specific architectural artefacts as a means to understand their functioning and approaches to conservation. 
 
 The Theory of Architectural Conservation 
 
   You'll learn the social, cultural, political, aesthetic, economic and environmental values that underpin current conservation policy and practice and the approaches to conservation these generate locally and internationally, to ascertain their appropriateness in specific contexts. 
 
 Urban Design History 
 
   You'll learn how elements such as streets, squares, urban blocks have changed through time and what factors shaped them. 
 
 Urban Theory 
 
   You'll learn how urban ideas, theories and approaches have responded to contextual conditions in time and how they have shaped human lives and the environment for generations to come; as well as the current urban challenges and the fit of current urban design tools and approaches. 
 
 Urban Landscape Design
 
   You'll learn the impact of the urban landscape on human wellbeing and perception, and the role of ecological networks as an integral part of urban form. 
 
 Sustainability
 
   You'll learn the impact that urban growth has on social, economic and environmental sustainability. 
 
 International Workshop
 
   You'll pursue an area of specific interest out-with the confines of the set curriculum, developing awareness of cultural diversity and integration within an international context. 
  
 Dissertation
 Dissertation Project
  
  Students on the Masters stream (MArch and MSc) are required to complete a substantial piece of research, which can entail a design or written investigation of an area/topic of interest. 
  This piece of work is generally carried out over a summer semester and is an opportunity for you to explore in great detail or breadth an issue of design relevance through engagement with its cultural, technical, and/or professional context. 
  Work produced in this phase can take many formats, - architectural/urban design, films, written pieces and pamphlets, exhibitions, installations - but ought to demonstrate your capacity to develop a brief and resolve it. 
  
 Portfolio
 ARB/RIBA PART 2 Portfolio: (AAD and MADi) 
  
  Over the two years of the programme you're expected to compile a comprehensive academic portfolio which will include all design projects undertaken over the two years of study as well as the outputs of any subject classes. 
  Your own academic work should be accompanied by the project briefs and all feedback documentation received. The portfolio should be complied in a digital format offering a clear structure and navigation. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 Each part of the course allows you to explore and develop projects related to your own interests in contemporary architecture.﻿ 
 The course is made up of studio design work, lectures, special projects and workshops. 
 The focus of study is on design project work including the analysis, synthesis and appraisal of design ideas. You’ll show your understanding of these ideas through drawings, physical and digital models, written and graphic work. 
 