Course content 
 Law & Practice of Construction Management
  
  Issues covered include: 
   
   health & safety 
   public produrement law 
   letters of intent 
   construction procurement methods & risk allocation 
   private finance initiative 
   environmental law 
   
 
 Context of Construction
  
  This class is compulsory for Law graduates undertaking the LLM or PgDip in Construction Law.    
  It will familiarise you with the structure, processes, procedures, and all the many professionals that are involved in the Construction Industry, like project managers, architects, designers, planners, civil engineers, building services and quantity surveyors. 
 
 Legal Process & The Law of Contact and Other Obligations 
  
  This class is compulsory for PgDip and LLM students in Construction Law who do not have a law degree.   
  It offers a basic introduction to the laws of contract and delict. It will help to establish the foundation of a more advanced and detailed knowledge and understanding of Construction Law in other classes taken. 
  This class is delivered by online webcasts along with four seminars which will be attended in person. 
 
 Law of the Construction Industry
 
   This class will provide you with a detailed knowledge and understanding of the principal features and structure of construction and engineering contracts, and the rights and duties of employers, contractors, professionals and others. 
 
 Construction Dispute Resolution
  
  Issues covered include: 
   
   sources & principals of Arbitration Law - international and domestic 
   Adjudication - an in-depth examination of case law and practice flowing from the 1996 Construction Act 
   alternative dispute resolution techniques 
   expert witness 
   enforcement & diligence 
   advocacy 
   
  
 Learning & teaching 
 Some modules are taught by lectures via webcast. Others are taught in a traditional face-to-face format. 
 All core construction law modules and the compulsory module in Research Methods are taught in the evenings (normally 6-8pm) or by webcast. 
 Many elective modules are also taught in the evening, though some are available during the day. 
 