Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Chemical & Statistical Analysis
  
  The class aims to develop an integrated knowledge and ability to apply the principles of chemical (titrimetry), statistical and chemometric methods in the quantitative/qualitative analysis of drugs and related substances, including their effectiveness. 
  The class also aims to provide an understanding of: 
   
   the physicochemical properties of drug substances 
   the stability of drugs or formulations 
   the basic calculations used in the analysis of drugs 
   the principles and application of method validation in analytical procedures 
   
 
 Spectrophotometric & Spectroscopic Methods
  
  The class aims to develop a detailed knowledge of a variety of spectrophotometric techniques used in the quantitative/qualitative analysis of drugs and related substances. The lectures are integrated with “real world” examples in the use of each technique in the quantitative/ qualitative analysis of pharmaceuticals/related substances to ensure you have the ability to apply learnt principles. 
  Techniques studied include: 
   
   UV/visible spectrophotometry 
   Fluorescence spectrophotometry 
   Infrared spectrophotometry 
   Near infrared spectrophotometry 
   Raman spectrophotometry 
   Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
   Mass spectrometry - lectures and workshops cover both electron impact and atmospheric ionisation techniques (electrospray and chemical ionisation) 
   
  The class also provides an understanding of the application of UV, IR, NMR and MS techniques in the structural elucidation of known (and new) drugs and/or chemical entities. 
 
 Chromatography
  
  The class aims to develop an integrated knowledge and ability to apply the principles of separation (chromatographic) techniques and methods in the quantitative/qualitative analysis of drugs and related substances. Techniques studied include: 
   
   Thin Layer Chromatography 
   Gas Chromatography 
   High Performance Liquid Chromatography 
   Capillary Electrophoresis 
   
 
 Bioanalysis, biotechnology & quality and management
  
  This class aims to give you a thorough understanding of the procedures used to analyse drugs in biological matrices. You'll also obtain a thorough understanding of the procedures used to assure quality in both synthetic and biotechnologically produced drugs. 
 
 Chemical & Spectroscopic Methods
  
  This class is laboratory based and is used to develop practical lab skills of relevance to current industrial and academic practice. 
  The aims of this class are to provide you with an appreciation and knowledge of the practical skills necessary when using chemical and spectroscopic techniques for the qualitative and quantitative analysis of pharmaceutical substances and ingredients in formulations. 
 
 Chromatographic & Bioanalytical Methods
  
  This class is laboratory based and is used to develop practical lab skills of relevance to current industrial and academic practice. It has been designed to enable you to develop an integrated knowledge base and critical understanding of the practical skills relating to the pharmaceutical analysis and quality control of medicinal products, as preparation for progress to practice as a pharmaceutical analyst. 
  The class provides an appreciation of chromatographic techniques used in the qualitative, quantitative analysis of pharmaceutical substances and ingredients in formulations.   
 
 Research Project
  
  Students who pass the necessary number of class passes are eligible to do a research project to gain the required number of credits for an MSc. 
  The research project takes place over ten weeks from May until the end of August. Projects can be internal (within SIPBS) or external. 
  We have external placements within pharmaceutical companies, other Universities, government/European bodies and other industries. We aim to place as many students as we can in external placements. Internal placements are conducted with members of staff from SIPBS, usually within an area of active research within the department. These internal projects are by no means inferior to external placements, and students regularly achieve their name on scientific publications from these projects. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is taught by experts based in SIPBS. There’s also specialised lectures from visiting professors and world-renowned scientists who are working in the pharmaceutical and analytical industries and legislative bodies, including the European Pharmacopoeia. 
 Teaching of theory and applications is through lectures, tutorials and web-based learning. The material is further reinforced with practical sessions which provide you with hands-on experience with a wide range of modern instrumental techniques. 
 