Course content 
 The Msc International Marketing Programme reflects the dynamic and technologically innovative nature of contemporary marketing, spanning private, public and third sectors. 
 The academic year consists of 3 stages: Semester 1, Semester 2 and Summer term. 
 Semester 1: core classes 
 Key Skills
  
  This class provides support for assessed classes by covering the skills associated with academic writing needed to complete the postgraduate programmes. 
  One of the aims common to the MSc International Marketing, MSc Marketing and MSc Tourism Marketing Management is to develop the potential of our graduates to become senior business managers who work in global markets. As such, the level of professionalism with which tasks are approached and the ability to solve complex problems logically, to work in groups and to communicate effectively are crucial. 
  This class aims to develop these skills and in so doing, support the work in other classes, particularly Marketing Works. 
 
 Strategic Global Marketing
  
  This class seeks to develop students’ understanding of the alternative strategies available to the internationalising firm for selecting, entering, developing and leaving international markets. 
  It discusses the motivations for internationalisation before placing the international business in its theoretical context. Market selection decisions and the market entry modes available to firms, small, medium and large, are considered in depth, with international market divestment providing a suitable culmination to the class. 
 
 Cross Cultural Buyer Behaviour
 
   This class considers the influence of culture on consumer behaviour. An understanding and empathy with different cultures is important for any international marketing strategy. Similarly, an understanding of consumer behaviour is fundamental to the marketing process. 
 
 International Marketing Research 
  
  Marketing research and customer information provide key input to the development of a company's marketing strategy. The marketing concept is better implemented when information about the market, the competitors and potential buying behaviour is available. 
  This class introduces the decisions and stages of the marketing research process, within the context of customer and market information now available from a wide range of sources including databases, loyalty cards and the internet. 
 
 Brand Management & Strategy 
  
  This class provides a detailed understanding of brand theory and application of key brand strategies. Brands such as American Express and Levis jeans will be reviewed. 
  Aspects and theories of brand management will be presented and discussed in order to equip the student to manage effectively in a global brand environment. Students will gain a clear appreciation of the role of brand strategy within the corporation’s operating plan. This will entail consideration of environmental factors causing changes to the structure and composition of the brand portfolio as well as discussion of conceptual issues surrounding the strategic roles of brand management. 
  A theoretical look at how a company’s brand value is created and measured will be a key objective of this core class. Using core brand theories and concepts, this class reviews and applies brand strategies to a variety of business cases. The course is rich in branding theory and will put the theory to practice using branding applications to industry and reviewing key companies branding strategies. 
 
 Semester 2 
 Marketing Works: Group Consultancy Project
  
  The Marketing Works project provides students with a challenging organisation-based, action-learning opportunity to advise a company on a marketing problem/opportunity. 
  Students will consult their client-firms or client-organisations with the objective of delivering realistic recommendations which if implemented could reasonably be expected to help generate strategic marketing plans. The scope of the project is to allow students to work in groups to manage the project at hand, and communicate their outcomes to their clients. 
  The groups are responsible for managing their relationships with their clients, and will be assigned a supervisor from the Department who will oversee the students’ progress. 
 
 Dissertation Skills
 
   In preparation for the Dissertation an intensive 3 week course known as Dissertation Skills is taught early in the 2nd semester, covering all aspects required for successful submission. By the end of this class, combined with necessary readings, students should be sufficiently prepared to undertake their dissertation, having submitted a research proposal, which requires a pass mark to proceed. 
  
 Elective classes
 
 You will be required to choose four 10 credit elective classes from those available. The range varies from year to year but is anticipated that those listed below, or similar options will be offered.
  
 Destination Marketing Management
  
  The destination is the core element of tourism supply. It is defined in spatial as well as cultural/symbolic terms and encompasses a wide variety of sectors such as hospitality, the built and natural environments, cultural heritage, entertainment, sport and retailing. 
  The diverse nature of the destination and lack of central ‘control’ implies quite specific challenges and responses in its management and marketing. This class will equip students with the skills necessary to engage with these. 
 
 Managing Tourism Resources
  
  This class provides an introduction to the structure and management of individual tourism organisations and attraction resources in the private, public and third sectors. 
  It begins with an overview of key industries involved in the distribution of tourism products (tour operators, travel agencies, e-mediaries); those that facilitate tourist transport and accommodation (e.g. the international airline and hotel sectors) before focusing on the sustainable management of key resources at destination level (e.g. culture, heritage, sport and events). 
  A theme running throughout the class will be the recognition by managers of the important role of tourism consumers in the co-creation of products, services and experiences and introduces students to the challenging management environment where tourism is produced and consumed at sources of demand, supply and the transit routes linking both. 
 
 International Services Marketing
  
  Services represent more than a quarter of all world trade and the world market for services is growing at more than twice the rate of the product sector. Over the past two decades, academics and practitioners have become aware of the need to adopt a different emphasis when marketing services rather than products. Many companies producing products are turning to service to provide their differentiation. 
  At the heart of this elective is the recognition that services present unique challenges, and that building customer relationships through quality service is fundamental to marketing success in every organisation. The aim of this elective is to provide an introduction to the special challenges of Services Marketing with a particular focus on the international context. 
 
 Sector Studies
 
   This elective option focuses on a specific marketing sector in a geographical location other than the UK. In previous years students have travelled to a European city or a Middle Eastern location to study luxury brands, artisanal products and digital marketing within a cultural context. The specific content will vary according to the location and expertise of the academic staff. 
 
 Contemporary Consumers 
  
  This elective class is designed to build upon the core consumer behaviour class by developing in-depth knowledge of current thinking in the discipline and by analysing a range of contemporary consumer contexts. 
 
 Customer Management 1
  
  The Customer Management I course focuses on formulating and implementing customer management strategies and policies, a task undertaken in most companies at different strategic and operational levels. The relationship between a company and a customer has many facets, which find their foundation in the experience the customer seeks. Leading companies understand that competitive advantage can only be achieved by managing multiple markets, not just consumer markets, but also supplier, referral, internal markets etc. 
  These markets are crucial for creating a great customer experience and to maintain customer relationships. ‘Customer experience’ is context dependent and consequently, companies uncover the key drivers of customer experience in individual market segments. Overall, the course introduces the experience-driven Relationship Marketing approach – a modern approach of understanding and managing customers for the long-term both in the B2C and the B2B contexts. 
 
 Customer Management 2 – Digital Marketing
  
  The major premise of this class is that customer relationships are in a period of rapid change: digital technologies, including the Internet, e-commerce and social media platforms, are moving the balance of power in relationships through customer engagement to a ‘customer led’ phase. This class aims at developing students’ knowledge and skills-based expertise in planning, implementing and managing successful e-marketing strategies. 
  The students will be exposed to a synthesis of well- established digital marketing theories and the most recent academic research on e-marketing. The class also aims at providing students with hands-on experience in the use of digital technologies for marketing purposes. Thus the class has a very practical focus. 
 
 Export Marketing
 
   This class focuses on exporting, the market servicing mode most commonly adopted by small to medium sized enterprises and firms in the early stages of internationalisation. The class covers both export strategy and export management issues and examines the latest research in export marketing. 
 
 Integrated Marketing Communications
  
  Marketing Communications, bridge the gap between an organisation and its many stakeholders, provide a face and give voice to organisations. They can also help organisations build relationships and connect with their audiences and various stakeholders. 
  Marketing Communications are recognised for their strategic and tactical roles in developing successful organisations, including commercial, not-for-profit, small and large sized firms. Marketing Communications is an exciting, vibrant and contemporary topic and the study of marketing communications can contribute to laying the foundations for future careers in marketing. 
  This class will explore relevant marketing communications theories, consider the role and purpose of marketing communications, critically review constituent components of the marketing communications mix and consider how marketing communication tools are used in practice. In particular, the class will consider the need for and management of Integrated Marketing Communications (IMC) and identify those factors that impact upon the selection, implementation and evaluation of effective IMC. 
 
 International Culture & Heritage Marketing
  
  This class explores the marketing of cultural and heritage as ‘resources’ in a global context. It aims to introduce students to the essential dimensions of culture, heritage and the arts as resources for many types of organisation, both private and public sector, in activities such as tourism, festivals and events, community redevelopment and corporate branding. 
  The class brings together theoretical and practical dimensions which need to be understood by cultural, heritage and tourism managers if these resources are to be used responsibly and sustainably. 
 
 Sports Marketing in a Global Context
  
  This class covers the topic areas that will allow class participants to understand and apply core concepts and frameworks that are relevant in the field of sports marketing and management. It takes a global focus. 
  This recognises that many key sporting events are increasingly taking place in non-traditional locations, e.g. Dubai, India and China. Feedback from alumni and sports organisations suggests that there is a lack of suitably qualified marketing graduates and post-graduates who have the specialised knowledge and skill sets to perform in the sporting environment. This class attempts to address this problem. 
 
  Retail Marketing Management
 
   This class assesses the role of retailing within the context of the overall supply chain and within the economy. The focus will be on global, as opposed to national trends and developments. This recognises that students who take this class come from a wide range of geographic regions and reflect a multi-cultural audience. 
 
 Summer term  
 Dissertation
  
  A good level of performance across both semesters and a satisfactory Research Proposal are necessary for students to progress to the Dissertation stage of the MSc. 
  The dissertation is your opportunity to study, in depth, a specific marketing (with an international focus) problem in an area of personal interest. 
  Dissertations typically involve desk research and literature reviews, then case studies of individual companies or small scale primary research. This provides scope for originality of thought, research fieldwork and analysis and presentation of results. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 A comprehensive support package is provided to enhance students' learning and to ensure maximum student benefit during their period of study. This includes, but is not limited to: 
  
  a package of essential texts for all core classes 
  employability seminars and career counselling 
  access to relevant databases 
  a student/staff consultative committee providing an effective mechanism for student feedback throughout the year 
  
 Students are also asked each year to evaluate the perceived value of both the quality of the teaching and the associated support package to ensure that the highest of standards are maintained. 
 The taught component of the course will be covered in semester 1 and 2. Both of these semesters will run for 12 weeks. At MSc level the dissertation is taken during the summer term. 
 The Learning and Teaching methods will vary between courses. These will include: 
  
  online updates 
  class discussions 
  role-playing exercises 
  case studies 
  directed reading tasks 
  guest lectures 
  student-led presentations 
  DVD/Podcast presentations 
  computer-based/experiential learning 
  self-motivated reading and research 
  
 