Course content 
 Semester 1 
 Principles of Finance
 
   This class provides an introduction to the basic principles of financial decision taking and the theory of finance. It will develop the basic principles of valuation, the nature of risk and uncertainty, the relationship between risk and returns. While the analysis will be developed in the context of corporate finance, looking at companies’ decisions in relation to investments in assets and how these assets will be funded, it considers the principles underlying financial reasoning that can be applied on a more general basis. 
 
 Accounting & Financial Analysis
  
  The aim of this class is to provide you with an understanding of the basic principles of financial accounting and financial analysis, the ability to interpret financial statements and their use in assessing the financial position and performance of companies. 
  This class provides an introduction to the principles of accounting and the analysis of financial statements. The class will enable you to prepare financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and to interpret and analyse these statements. 
  Particular emphasis is placed on the accounting concepts and information employed in financial analysis and decision taking. You'll develop the ability to prepare and interpret financial statements and construct cash forecasts. In addition, you'll develop an understanding of the demand and supply for accounting information; an appreciation of the role of financial analysis and analysts; and an awareness of the statistical characteristics of accounting numbers. 
 
 Quantitative Methods for Finance
  
  This class aims to provide an introduction to statistical techniques that are commonly used in finance, a basic understanding of econometric analysis, and an appreciation of the general role of quantitative methods in finance. It also aims to develop the practical computational skills of participants by offering an opportunity to solve problems using statistical software. 
  The class will focus on the application of statistical techniques in empirical analysis in finance. 
 
 International Financial Markets & Banking
  
  The aim of the class is to provide you with an understanding of the financial system and the roles and functions of financial markets and institutions. 
  A particular emphasis is placed on understanding the roles of intermediaries such as banks and investment firms. You'll develop an understanding of the various characteristics and roles of fixed income, equity, and foreign exchange markets. While some attention will be given to the UK financial markets, the global nature of financial markets will be widely discussed. 
  This class aims to equip you with an awareness and understanding of financial markets and institutions in the context of the global economy. Particular emphasis will be placed on the role and contribution of the banking sector. This class covers the reasons for, and nature of, of financial markets and institutions with a particular focus on banking, the global nature of these markets and their regulation. 
 
 Semester 2 
 Advanced Corporate Finance & Applications
  
  The aim of this class is to discuss the different ways in which firms can raise funds, internally and externally, and the role of capital markets in determining the terms on which funding will be available. 
  The costs and risks of difference sources of financing and the role of taxation will also be covered. It will also provide you with a working knowledge of the leasing decision of a firm, of corporate financial planning, the management of working capital, the rationale for mergers and acquisitions, the implications of corporate governance, and issues related to corporate financial restructuring. 
  The class will cover the capital structure of companies, and their ability to raise finance through initial and seasoned equity capital issues. It will also examine mergers and acquisitions as major investments undertaken by companies, the firm’s working capital policy, and their payout policy in the form of dividends and stock market buybacks. The class will be conducted through a series of lectures and tutorials. 
 
 Advanced Accounting
  
  The class aims to give you an understanding of the practice of external financial reporting in the context of the quoted company. It emphasises the role of professional judgement in preparing financial statements. Financial reporting lies at the heart of corporate governance. 
  This is a vitally important area that creates opportunities for debate and discussion. The ongoing globalisation of accounting regulations means that it is possible to conduct such a discussion with an international audience. This class provides an introduction to the preparation and analysis of financial statements in a form suitable for publication. It builds upon the semester 1 class Accounting and Financial Analysis. 
  The emphasis will be on the forces that have driven the development of standards and regulations and on the issues arising from the application of accounting standards. 
 
 Management Accounting
  
  The course aims to give you a foundation in the theory and practice of management accounting. It emphasises the role of the management accountant in helping the owners and managers of a business to make decisions. 
  Different accounting information is required for different purposes: conventional cost accounting emphasises product costs for the allocation of costs between the cost of goods sold and inventories; decision-relevant costs provide information to help managers make resource allocation decisions; and responsibility accounting, cost control and performance measurement focus on both financial and non-financial information. 
  This course provides an introduction to the theory and practice of management accounting. It covers management accounting principles and their relevance to the business environment. It further involves a detailed exploration of the uses of management accounting information in the financial decision making process. 
 
 Elective classes
 Choose one from the following: 
 Security Analysis
  
  The aims of this class are to develop an appreciation of the investment characteristics of different types of securities, particularly bonds and shares, and to develop an understanding of how such securities are valued. 
  This class will build on the analysis developed in the first semester class, Principles of Finance. It will consider the determination of interest rates, the valuation of bonds, the management of bond portfolios, and the valuation of equities. 
 
 Portfolio Theory & Management
 
   The aim of this class is to examine the Markowitz (1952) approach to optimal portfolio selection. The class explores issues relating to optimal portfolio choice and issues in practical fund management. 
 
 Empirical Methods in Finance
 
   This class aims to build on the knowledge, understanding, and skills acquired in the Quantitative Methods in Finance class and extends it further, especially in the context of time series and panel data analysis. It focuses on applications in finance of econometric techniques and is extended to incorporate panel data analysis methods with their application in finance. 
 
 International Accounting
  
  The course aims to give you a foundation in the theory and practice of the study of international accounting. It emphasises the impact of culture and the dynamic of the relationships that have led to the remaining differences between national accounting systems. 
  Despite the huge advances in the international/global framework for accounting standard setting there are still issues worth exploring in the national differences in accounting. These arise from culture and concerns over national sovereignty. This course provides an overview of the topics arising from the comparison of national approaches to accounting. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The taught component of the course will be covered in the first two semesters. Both of these semesters will run for 12 weeks.   
 At MSc level the research project stage of the course is taken during the summer semester. 
 