Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Environmental Chemistry
 
   The class will provide you with the basic concepts of chemical analysis relevant to the environment, establish outline knowledge of a range of common analytical techniques and issues surrounding sample collection and handling. 
 
 Environmental Pollution Management
  
  This class develops in-depth knowledge & skills regarding the science, engineering & management of environmental pollution control approaches to protect public health. 
  The class achieves these aims through research-led teaching at the interface between public health and environmental engineering, with a particular focus on methodologies based on risk-centred approaches. 
  Lecture sessions are complemented by industrial & government case studies in contemporary air quality management practice. 
 
 Waste Management & Landfill Design
 
   This class covers organisational and regulatory aspects of waste management practice in the UK: legislation, composition of domestic and industrial wastes, storage, collection, reception, and disposal of solid wastes, clinical wastes, sewage sludge disposal, recycling and recovery. 
 
 Research Protocols for Science & Engineering
  
  The course will familiarise students with basic research methodology, including the use of scientific literature, quantitative and qualitative methods, the maintenance of laboratory notes and the use of scientific English. 
  Particular assistance is given on research techniques to prepare students for the dissertation/project stage of the course. 
 
 Elective Classes
 
 You can choose your optional classes from  our list of postgraduate taught classes. 
 Our MRes students also have the option of taking “Independent Study in Collaboration with Industry”. This exciting new module allows students to gain credits for work carried out with, at or for an external organisation﻿. Approval for students taking this module is done on a case-by-case basis by the MRes Course Director. Student participation is selected by competitive application and CV.﻿
  
 Learning & teaching 
 This course is delivered via a mixture or lectures, tutorial, practical laboratories and research seminars.    
 