Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Legal Research
  
  This offers general assistance for postgraduate legal study and to better equip you for other modules in your Masters degree and postgraduate diploma.   
  It covers legal research and the use of digital library resources, legal writing as well as completing a dissertation. 
 
 Elective classes
 The following classes are also available: 
 E-Commerce Law
  
  This module considers the law governing all forms of online commercial activity. 
  It focuses on two areas of particular importance: 
   
   electronic contracts 
   intermediary liability 
   
  The constraints on contracting in an online environment are central to most e-commerce activities and are therefore of great importance to the growth of e-commerce. 
 
 Intellectual Property Law
 
   You'll be introduced to the general principles, theories and substantive laws that provide the framework for the international, European and national intellectual property systems for the protection of copyright, trademark and patent. 
 
 International Intellectual Property
  
  This module considers the systems and institutions that form a part of the International Intellectual Property System.   
  It focuses upon legal developments at the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and their role in the associating of intellectual property with trade and investment.     
 
 Internet Governance 
  
  This class familiarises you with the technical function of the Internet, the main bodies involved in regulating the Internet, as well as introducing some sector-specific issues as case studies to help cement your understanding.   
  It will look at issues such as net neutrality, stakeholder governance and censorship/filtering on the Internet. 
 
 Telecommunications Law (compulsory for LLM in IT & Telecommunications Law)
  
  This class familiarises you with telecommunications law in its national, European and international contexts. 
  The course begins with an overview of the technical and historical development of telecommunications infrastructure, as well as expanding upon the principles of deregulation, market liberalisation and economic policy that led to the current market structure. 
 
 Privacy, Crime & Security 
  
  This module introduces you to the core ideas and legal regimes governing privacy and data protection online, as well as looking at the global issues concerning transnational data flows.   
  It covers regulation of spam, cookies and spyware; targeted advertising; and other venues for commercial collection of data. 
 
 Digital Copyright Law & Policy-making
  
  The objective of this interdisciplinary module is to expand on your knowledge of intellectual property law   by looking in extensive detail at one particularly topical issue. 
  You'll look at the interaction between different policy actors and their role in formulating policies concerning the exploitation of copyright in the digital environment. 
 
 Domain Name Regulation 
  
  The purpose of this module is to familiarise you with the ways in which domain names are exploited.    
  The module provides an overview of the use of domain names as a form of property, the dispute resolution process, and actors involved in regulating domain name use. 
 
 Internet Law & Politics 
  
  You will begin with a theoretically informed overview of the theories of Internet regulation. 
  You'll then apply this understanding to a range of case studies, including: 
   
   multi-stakeholder governance systems 
   the development of e-democracy and digital participation 
   looking at the Internet as a facilitator of legal and political change 
   
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The majority of this work is conducted on a self-study basis using the course materials provided. 
 This includes: 
  
  completing the readings for each session 
  participation in online forum discussions 
  writing a 1,500-word theme report as a mid-term assessment 
  
 This is prior to the main assignment. 
 Online discussions use the MyPlace platform and include tutor-led discussions and discussions on specific activities listed in the reading materials. 
 Student Competitions 
 The LLM in Internet Law & Policy holds a competition for the student with the best overall grade. 
 The prize is a gift certificate of up to &pound;50 for an academic book of your choice and a certificate of recognition of your achievement. 
 