Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Principles of Finance
 
   This class provides an introduction to the basic principles of financial decision taking and the theory of finance. It will develop the basic principles of valuation, the nature of risk and uncertainty, the relationship between risk and returns.  While the analysis will be developed in the context of corporate finance, looking at companies’ decisions on the investments in assets and how these investments will be funded and the nature of the markets in which it will also consider the principles underlying financial reasoning that can be applied on a more general basis. 
 
 Accounting & Financial Analysis
  
  The aim of this class is to provide you with an understanding of the basic principles of financial accounting and financial analysis, the ability to interpret financial statements and their use in assessing the financial position and performance of companies. 
  This class provides an introduction to the principles of accounting and the analysis of financial statements. It will enable you to prepare financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and to interpret and analyse these statements. Particular emphasis is placed on the accounting concepts and information employed in financial analysis and decision taking. 
  You'll develop the ability to prepare and interpret financial statements and construct cash forecasts. In addition, you'll develop an understanding of the demand and supply for accounting information; an appreciation of the role of financial analysis and analysts; and an awareness of the statistical characteristics of accounting numbers. 
 
 International Financial Markets & Banking
  
  The aim of the class is to provide you with an understanding of the financial system and the roles and functions of financial markets and institutions. A particular emphasis is placed on understanding the roles of intermediaries such as banks and investment firms. 
  You'll develop an understanding of the various characteristics and roles of fixed income, equity, and foreign exchange markets. While some attention will be given to the UK financial markets, the global nature of financial markets will be widely discussed. This class aims to equip you with an awareness and understanding of financial markets and institutions in the context of the global economy. Particular emphasis will be placed on the role and contribution of the banking sector. 
  This class covers the reasons for, and nature of, of financial markets and institutions with a particular focus on banking, the global nature of these markets and their regulation. 
 
 Professional Management Practice 
  
  This class develops your awareness and capabilities as a manager using a Personal Development Plan (PDP) process to help you critically evaluate the skills and attributes needed to be effective. Over the course of the year, workshops and exercises will help you identify and move towards fulfilling your potential. 
 
 Elective classes 
 Finance classes
 Choose at least one: 
 Topics in Corporate Finance
  
  In this class, you'll discuss the different ways in which firm's can raise funds, internally and externally, and the role of capital markets in determining the terms on which funding will be available, the costs and risks of difference sources of financing, and the role of taxation.    
 
 Security Analysis
 
   The aims of this class are to develop an appreciation of the investment characteristics of different types of securities, particularly bonds and shares, and to develop an understanding of how such securities are valued. This class will build on the analysis developed in the first semester class, Principles of Finance. It will consider the determination of interest rates, the valuation of bonds, the management of bond portfolios, and the valuation of equities. 
 
 Managerial Accounting
  
  This class develops your ability to understand the nature and limitations of the information provided in the external, and internal, financial reports. It introduces some of the accounting techniques underlying business activity, and builds your awareness of the financial implications of strategic and operational decisions. 
 
 Behavioural Finance
  
  The aim of the class is to provide you with an understanding of the main ideas of behavioural finance. A particular emphasis is placed on understanding the roles of non-rational actions and the development of new financial models that incorporate these ideas. 
  You'll engage with up to date research and develop a critical view of existing and new finance theories and models. It aims to introduce you to the rapid evolving area of behavioural finance. You'll develop an understanding of behavioural finance and an appreciation of its possible implications and applications. 
  This class introduces you to behavioural finance and provides you with an understanding of the main flaws of “traditional” finance theory from a behavioural finance viewpoint. It will allow you to develop the ability to discuss issues arising from violations of the rationality assumption and will enable you to evaluate new theoretical models based on research in psychology. 
  The course will allow you to appreciate the role of new developments in finance and their possible implications for established views of the functioning of financial markets. 
 
 Derivatives
  
  This class will provide you with a strong grounding in derivatives that may be used to manage the financial risks faced by individuals, financial institutions and business corporations.     
  
 Management classes
 Choose at least one: 
 Leadership for Change & Innovation 
  
  The central premise of this class is that whilst prudent management is essential, it is not sufficient to assure sustainable business success. Leadership in any sector involves using creativity and vision to navigate a unique path through wicked problems and turbulent times. 
  This class draws together the latest theories and practices to develop skills and understanding for effective leadership in the context of change. It also informs the practices of leadership in innovative project teams. 
 
 Global Business Environment
  
  Business organisations and management decisions and actions exist in a complex, dynamic and often turbulent environment. This class will develop your understanding of the many dimensions and layers of the global business environment. It'll encourage you to recognise, understand and reflect upon the challenges and opportunities that various aspects of the business environment present to businesses, organisations and managers operating in an international context. The class will also introduce you to a range of useful theories, concepts and tools for analysing the business environment and give them an opportunity to apply these to ‘real world’ and hypothetical management scenarios. 
 
 Project & Programme Management
  
  This class introduces the tools and techniques used in project and programme management. It'll begin by introducing the methods used to define the scope of a project including the objectives it needs to achieve and the deliverables to be generated. It then goes on to examine lifecycle management, planning and scheduling techniques and cost control before finishing with risk management. 
  The theme of this class is to promote project performance not only in terms of meeting the time, cost and performance targets of each specific contract but also in relation to complementing the overall business strategy by exceeding customer expectations and therefore leveraging new business. 
 
 Developing Effective Consulting Skills
  
  This class seeks to provide those contemplating management consulting as part of their career path with the insights and perspectives to be recognised as valuable to clients. 
  It recognises many of the foundational elements and skills of self-effectiveness and reflexivity developed in and throughout the course. It'll enhance these elements and skills by sharpening awareness of the subtlety and complexity of such issues that are key to trust and relationship-building in consulting. 
  The successful consultant is aware of the importance of areas of personal expertise and social capital, the importance of trust between client and consultant and the delivery of sustainable solutions. This class offers the opportunity for you to engage with theory and practice to develop your understanding and skills of intervening in organisations. 
  It's equally relevant if you're considering a career in management consulting or as senior managers tasked with the design and delivery of major organisational initiatives. 
 
 Managing in Europe
  
  This class gives you the skills involved in managing people in Europe with a focus on cultural and knowledge issues as well as managing cross-cultural differences. 
  You'll be able to understand the European context in terms of human resource management and employment relations and manage effectively in this context. You'll also be able to adapt to different cultural environments and to manage effectively in an intercultural European context as well as a global context. 
 
 Marketing Management
  
  The nature of how we think about ‘markets’, and the activities involved in trying to understand and communicate with customers, is changing rapidly. This class examines contemporary international practice, exploring the major concepts and techniques involved in the marketing planning process. It'll help you analyse what companies are offering, how customers behave, and ultimately identify what they need to do next to deliver on their objectives. 
 
 Semester 3
 Summer classes 
 Business Strategy
  
  This class provides opportunities to explore, understand and apply the language of strategy and strategic management. By examining real-life organisations, you will develop your understanding of the forces within their contextual and transactional environments that influence their strategy, and by applying different strategic frameworks, develop the ability to critically analyse the strategic direction being adopted. 
 
 Project Methodology
  
  This class introduces you to a range of different methodological approaches to conducting research and key issues researchers are commonly faced with (eg relevance of practitioner engagement, ethics). You'll be provided with a broad overview of research choices and issues from the perspective of Strathclyde staff representing each department in the Business Faculty who will present vignettes from their own research projects. 
 
 Project 1: Finance & Project 2: Management
  
  These projects provide you with a valuable opportunity to apply what you have learned through the taught modules to a more practical situation. Working under the supervision of a faculty member, you'll spend time working individually, or in a group, on a topic of central interest in these areas. You'll learn the skills needed to develop a proposal and conduct an effective enquiry into your topic areas, producing reports that are both informed and practical. 
  Project subject matters are diverse, with a vast array of industries and topics to consider. While many projects can be subject specific, increasingly, many projects are undertaken with organisations, which allow you to learn more about a specific industry or work with a particular company. 
  Our experience shows that such interactions often act as a catalyst for future career opportunities. While you'll be encouraged to put forward your own suggestion of a company, we do have client projects on offer, so are more than happy to assist you in identifying appropriate clients and partnerships. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is delivered through a series of lectures, workshops, case studies and problem solving activities.   
    
 