Course content 
 As well as the following classes, you may take a class for one of the other MSc/LLM courses in the Law School. Take a look at our full list of PGT courses. 
 Compulsory classes 
 Theory & Principles of Conflict Resolution
  
  The aim of the module is for you to develop a critical awareness of the theoretical and disciplinary sources of conflict resolution. 
 
 Mediation in Practice
  
  You'll develop an ethical and self-critical approach to mediation practice that takes account of the current range of models. 
  
 
 Compulsory for LLM/MSc/PgDip﻿
  
 Legal Research
  
  The aim of the class is to help you enhance your research abilities and skills with a view to improving your performance in your courses. The class is divided into five main topics. 
  This class is taught entirely by way of distance learning.  Lectures have been recorded in webcast and podcast form. 
 
 Elective classes 
 Mediation, the Law & Policy
  
  This class examines the relationship between mediation and the law, in particular looking at issues of confidentiality, adversarialism and civil justice, and the role of lawyers within the process. It considers recent reviews of civil and administrative justice and employment practice for their impact on mediation, as well as critiques of mediation’s ‘institutionalisation’ from Scotland and abroad. It also examines the development of a mediation profession and issues such as training, continuous professional development, accreditation and regulation. 
  You'll be expected to participate in all seminars while some students will be identified to lead the discussion on each topic.   
 
 Conflict Resolution & the State
  
  You'll develop a critical understanding of the ways in which the state utilises alternative dispute resolution. 
 
 Negotiation
  
  This class teaches negotiation in a variety of settings. It provides an overview of theories and models, establishing key principles for effective negotiation. It also uses practical negotiation exercises to build your knowledge and skills, covering such topics as business contracts, the public sector and personal injury. 
 
 Employment Mediation
  
  You'll develop knowledge and skills in the use of mediation in employment disputes. 
 
 MSc Dissertation / LLM Dissertation
  
  Once a student on the LLM/MSc programme passes all six classes they will be permitted to proceed to dissertation.   
  Three months are normally given to complete the dissertation and a supervisor will be allocated to students after the Progress Board of Examiners Meeting in May/June each year. 
 
 Legal Process & The Law of Contract & Other Obligations
  
  This module is for students with a non-law background. 
  Delivery of this module is through both on-line learning with webcasts and attendance at four seminars in the Law School. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 Lectures are delivered on weekday evenings and weekends. 
 