Course content 
 Semester 1 
 Essentials of Forensic Science 1
 
   This class provides a broad knowledge of forensic science which you can build upon with more specialist knowledge. It introduces aspects of criminalistics such as trace evidence. You’ll learn about a range of evidence types and how they are analysed. You will also explore the interpretation of evidence and its value in an investigative setting. 
 
 Essentials of Forensic Science 2
 
   This class introduces the legal system and forensic science in context. You’ll explore the interpretation of evidence, including bayesian approaches. You’ll also be introduced to quality assurance and encouraged to explore ethical considerations in forensic science. 
 
 Essentials of Forensic Science: Practical
 
   This practical class will familiarise you techniques such as body fluid presumptive testing, document examination, footwear impressions, and various microscopy techniques. You will also have the opportunity to carry out these techniques. 
  
 
 Practical Crime Scene & Court Exercise
 
   You’ll work in a team as a crime scene examiner to process a simulated crime scene. Evidence will be processed and taken back to the laboratory where you’ll analyse it. This exercise is offered in partnership with Strathclyde University Law School and provides a more realistic, immersive experience. After being deposed by the legal teams, you’ll give evidence in a courtroom setting, presided over by a Sheriff from Glasgow Sheriff Court. 
 
 Semester 2 
 Forensic Biology 1
 
   This specialist class introduces the methods and practises used in forensic biology laboratories. You’ll cover underlying theory and how it’s used in the justice system and in criminal investigations. You’ll learn about biological trace and fibre evidence, explore the design of scientific work and the interpretation and effective communication of results. 
 
 Forensic Chemistry 1
 
   This specialist class introduces the methods and practices used in forensic chemistry laboratories. You’ll learn the underlying theory and be encouraged to consider how it’s used in the justice system and in criminal investigations. You’ll cover questioned document examination, alcohol analysis and its interpretation. In addition, you’ll also explore the design of scientific work and the interpretation and effective communication of results. 
 
 Practical Examination in Optional Classes
 
   You’ll be introduced to the practical methods explored in the specialist biology and forensic chemistry classes. Using a case approach you’ll gain independence in laboratory work, develop skills in interpreting evidence and presenting results to aid the courts. 
 
 Semester 3 
 Dissertation
 
   MSc students will complete a 3-month research project and dissertation to complete the course. Where possible, you'll undertake a placement (often in a practising forensic science laboratory) and present your findings in the form of a dissertation. 
  
 