Course content 
 The course is designed around three practitioner toolkits, therapeutic, health service quality improvement and research. Each theme contains classes designed to address a range of development needs.
  
 You can take any combination of classes for the PgCert/PgDip. For the MSc you must complete Research Skills class. 
 Therapeutics toolkit 
 Elective classes  
 Advanced clinical assessment & consultation skills 
  
  The aim of the class is to understand the clinical assessment process and gain experience in conducting consultations to support clinical decision making for individual patients. 
  The class will study the following topics: 
   
   Consultation skills and behaviours 
   Frameworks for effective clinical assessment 
   Clinical decision making skills 
   Skills development through use of mannequins, expert patients/volunteers and patients in clinical practice 
   
 
 Advanced therapeutics & health innovation 
  
  The aim of this class is to explore the complexity of clinical care through the inter-relationship between co-morbidity, advancing diagnostic and treatment innovation, resource management and the wishes of individual patients. 
  The class will look at these topics: 
   
   Health technology assessment process illustrated through the Scottish Medicines Consortium approach 
   Clinical science advancements in diagnostics and monitoring of disease 
   Therapeutic advancements including genomics and stratified medicine 
   Complex clinical care decision making in clinical specialities 
   
 
 Clinical practice attachment 
  
  The aim of this class is to gain experience and exposure to a heath service specialty and the associated clinical team. 
  The class will study the following themed topics: 
   
   Clinical therapeutics and advancements in a clinical speciality 
   Communicating with the multidisciplinary team 
   Complex clinical care decision making and preparation of pharmaceutical care plans in a clinical speciality 
   
 
 Health Service Quality Improvement toolkit 
 Elective classes 
 Quality Improvement Methodology 
  
  To aim of this class is to provide an introduction to the principles and practice of quality improvement in healthcare through gaining an understanding of the knowledge, skills and behaviours required. 
  The class will look at the following topics: 
   
   Quality and quality improvement definitions and policy within healthcare 
   Quality improvement methods 
   Measurement for improvement 
   Team relationships in quality improvement programmes 
   Practical application of a QI project practice 
   
 
 Pharmacist Independent Prescribing
  
  The aim of this class is to prepare clinicians to be pharmacist independent prescribers in clinical practice within NHS Scotland. 
  This class comprises the current Pharmacist Independent Prescribing (IP) course approved by GPhC covering the following topics:    
   
   Therapeutics 
   Communication with patients and colleagues 
   Prescribing and public health 
   Care planning 
   Period of learning in practice 
   
 
 Clinical service development 
  
  The aim of this class is to introduce the principles and practice of planning a clinical service development. 
  The class will study the following themed topics: 
   
   Service development framework 
   Communicating with the multidisciplinary team 
   Stages in the formulation of a service development proposal 
   Preparing written service development proposal 
   
 
 Research toolkit  
 Research Skills 
  
  The aim of this class is to develop knowledge and skills in research methodology and analysis to enable practitioners to plan a project within clinical practice. 
  The class will study the following themed topics: 
   
   Framing a clinical question for research 
   Literature search construction, execution and reporting 
   Quantitative & qualitative research methods and design 
   Quantitative & qualitative analytical approaches   
   Research & ethics considerations in clinical research 
   Protocol design 
   
 
 Research Project 
  
  The aim of   the class is to provide experience in the design, implementation and reporting of a clinical research project. 
  The class will study the following themed topics: 
   
   Literature review 
   Project design and approvals 
   Project implementation and data collection 
   Data analysis 
   Manuscript and poster preparation 
   
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course places a strong emphasis on student-centred learning delivered through a blended learning approach. There's a combination of e-learning materials, small group tutorials and workshops led by experienced staff, student presentations and work-based practice activities. Class material is available through online learning tools which can be accessed at any time. 
 The Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences has a well-established relationship with NHS Scotland and a number of leading clinicians have visiting or honorary appointments. The course team combines both academic and clinical expertise to deliver classes that provide both the scientific knowledge and practical skills that are necessary to achieve the changes required to improve patient care. 
 Together we undertake collaborative research focused on the “Better Use of Medicines” through the study of real-world clinical data (pharmacoepidemiology) and the design and testing of novel healthcare intervention models in clinical practice settings (practice research).   
 