Course content 
 Genealogical, Palaeographic & Heraldic Studies is offered at three different levels. Our flexible learning programme allows you to work through each level of study, as outlined below: 
  
  to gain the PgCert qualification, you must complete the first group of classes listed below 
  to achieve the PgDip, you must complete the PgCert qualification and the next three classes 
  for the MSc qualification, you must complete the first two stages and then finish the final class 
  
 Postgraduate Certificate classes 
 Professional Practice & Methodologies
  
  This session provides a context for genealogical practice in a wide variety of environments. You'll progress with a common level of knowledge and understanding of key concepts and practice, including: 
   
   ethics & standards in genealogy 
   analysis of evidence problems 
   business practice 
   an introduction to palaeography 
   the recording & presentation of data 
   
     
 
 Archives & Libraries, History & Geography
  
  You'll be given a grounding in the use of record and archival sources, physical and online, including genealogical literature and where to find it (catalogues of printed and manuscript genealogies and pedigrees; indexes and directories, etc). Also discussed are: 
   
   copyright legislation 
   maps & other geographic sources 
   money & coinage 
   dates & calendars 
   burgesses & guilds 
   local government structures in the United Kingdom 
   
     
 
 Censuses, Civil Registers & Church Records
  
  This class is a systematic foundation in the use of various sources, including birth, marriage, death and census records from across the United Kingdom. 
  Census substitutes (poll books, electoral rolls, valuation and taxation assessments and subsidy lists, poor law registers, etc) and ecclesiastical records (OPR, parish registers, bishops' transcripts, Kirk Session and parish administration records, etc) are also covered. 
 
 Family History Studies & Overseas Records
  
  This class introduces the use of DNA in genealogical research; upon completion students will understand the various tests available and their use alongside traditional research methods. 
  Demography, research into the nobility and landed gentry and other family research along with Irish records, migration and emigration are covered as well as personal records such as occupation, military and education records. 
 
 Property & Law, Wills, Land & Inheritance
  
  You'll be given a methodical basis for the use of various document types, including the inheritance of property and land, wills, testaments and inventories across the United Kingdom. 
  Other areas covered include local and central government records (taxation, evaluation, elections, legal records, the courts of equity, records of chancery and exchequer) and a deeper look at palaeography records. 
 
 Latin, Palaeography & Heraldry
  
  When you complete this class, you'll recognise specific types of documents, their structure and intent and be able to transcribe and translate these from Latin sufficiently to extract relevant genealogical information from them. 
  The origins and intentions of Scottish and English heraldry and heraldic art are covered and students will understand heraldry’s use in tracing families. 
 
 Postgraduate Diploma classes 
 Methods of Professional Enquiry & Project
  
  Methods of Professional Enquiry is a University requirement if you're undertaking postgraduate study. As well as requiring you to demonstrate that you've acquired an understanding of a range of research methods and ways in which they can be deployed, this class provides practical skills in professional research and practice and introduces archival record management. 
 
 Genealogy, Heraldry & Social History 2
  
  Here you'll deepen and extend your knowledge of sources and genealogical techniques used when researching non-UK countries and in mediaeval genealogy. Certain specialist topics such as the advanced uses of DNA in genealogy and Jewish genealogy are also covered. 
  Areas covered include: 
   
   the British Empire 
   Europe 
   Australia 
   New Zealand 
   the USA 
   Canada 
   Ireland in depth 
   
     
 
 Documents & Palaeography 2
  
  When you complete this class, you'll have critically analysed English and Scottish documents and charters. You'll understand the frameworks in which documents were written and be able to demonstrate independent study through the creation of written &Eacute;tudes. &Eacute;tude study topics are: 
   
   a house/building history 
   a migration event study 
   a client family research project 
   a geographic area study 
   
  You have a free choice of subject within these &eacute;tude ﻿topics. 
 
 MSc classes 
 Professional Enquiry & Development Leading to a Dissertation
  
  The Masters stage of the Genealogical, Palaeographic and Heraldic Studies programme comprises one compulsory class. This requires you to plan, implement and evaluate a major piece of research, which involves carrying out an investigative and developmental project of genealogical relevance which will be assessed on the basis of a dissertation of 12,000-16,000 words. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is taught entirely online using the University’s Virtual Learning Environment called ‘myplace’. Throughout the course we use: 
  
  online discussion forums 
  written and audio lectures 
  multimedia presentations 
  real time audio chat sessions 
  
 