Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 International Institutions & Regimes 
  
  This class provides an understanding of the theories, practices and processes through which global politics are organised.    
  It's an assessment of the future of international institutions and regimes in global governance. 
 
 European Governance
  
  This class examines key processes, policy areas and proposals for reform in the EU system of governance. 
  You'll consider the role of the EU and the nature of its relationship with its public. 
 
 Principles of Research Design
 
   This class enables you to evaluate alternative research designs and formulate appropriate research proposals. 
 
 Contemporary International Relations
  
  This class provides exposure to critical concepts necessary to pursue further coursework focusing on international relation. Through the readings and discussion, you'll get a sense of where the literature has been and where it's going. As you move forward with your studies, this class will help you develop a fuller sense of the context in which other work you read is situated. 
  International relations is a very popular field within political science and this is a compulsory class for all our students. 
  If you're interested in international relations, you'll find it necessary to learn the key concepts and critical literature in the field in order to successfully develop your original projects. 
     
 
 Elective classes
 Choose two classes. 
 Elective Classes
  
  These may include: 
   
   Quantitative Methods I 
   Quantitative Methods II 
   Qualitative Methods 
   Policy Analysis 
   Comparative Public Policy 
   European Political Economy 
   
 
 Contesting Global Governance 
  
  This class investigates claims that increasingly globalised forms of participation and protest are emerging. 
  It seeks to evaluate their political significance by examining key policy controversies: 
   
   security 
   economics 
   environment 
   human rights 
   regional integration 
   
  
 Learning & teaching 
 All classes are taught in seminars. You'll receive training with a strong empirical focus, supervision in small group seminars as well as individual sessions. 
 Classes average 20 contact hours with additional computer laboratory sessions. 
 If you’re studying part-time you’ll attend classes across two academic years. You’ll then work on a dissertation over 10 months. 
 Indicative Readings 
  
  Held, D and McGrew, A (2007) Globalization/Anti-globalization: Beyond the Great Divide. Polity Press. 
  Kaul, I, Grunberg, I and Stern, M.A. (1999) Global Public Goods: International Cooperation in the 21st Century. Oxford University Press. 
  Reus-Smit, C & Snidal, D (2010) The Oxford Handbook of International Relations. Oxford University Press. 
  Willetts, P (2011) Non-governmental Organizations in World Politics: The Construction of Global Governance. Routledge. 
  
 