Course content 
 MSc
 
 This Masters is worth 60 credits. 
 It's based on roughly 600 hours of study time over a maximum of 40 weeks. 
 It will begin in October each year and final submission is in June of the following year.
  
 Compulsory classes 
 Research Project 
  
  This class requires you to plan, implement and evaluate a major piece of research and development work which involves carrying out an investigative and developmental project of professional relevance.   
  The project will be assessed on the basis of a report of 12,000 words. 
 
 Postgraduate Diploma
 
 This Postgraduate Diploma is worth 60 credits. 
 Each class is based on around 100-200 hours of study, over 8-12 weeks. 
 You can expect to spend a minimum of 15 hours each week on various activities associated with the course. This may vary from student to student, depending on previour knowledge and experience along with individual learning styles.
  
 Compulsory classes 
 Corporate Risk Management
  
  A primary task of managing any organisation is to ensure that risks to the health and safety of employees and other persons who may be adversely affected by their organisation’s acts, omissions or managerial decisions are being adequately identified and managed. In a similar way, the risks that can adversely affect the wellbeing of the organisation must be identified, evaluated and controlled. 
  This class will develop your ability to identify corporate risks, evaluate and quantify the level of risk and advise management on appropriate action which will bring such risks within the tolerability of the organisation’s resources and ability to cope. 
 
 Psychology of Workplace Activities 
  
  Many accidents associated with work can be attributed to human behaviour. 
  ﻿This class will assist those who direct and manage work activities to understand the individual and collective powers of the human mind and how these powers can be stimulated to achieve cost-effective benefits within the context of work activities. 
 
 Ergonomic Factors in Work Activities
  
  In this class you'll look at ergonomic design for everyone. You'll also look specifically at ergonomic design for people who have additional support needs. 
  Upon completing this class, you'll be equipped to take their acquired knowledge and skills into a wide range of work activities to enhance ergonomic factors. 
 
 Methods of Professional Enquiry 
  
  Entry to the Masters phase of the Safety and Risk Management Programme requires you to demonstrate that you've acquired an understanding of a range of research methods and ways in which they can be deployed. 
  This class must be taken by all students registered for the Postgraduate Diploma in Safety and Risk Management, whether or not you wish to proceed to Masters level immediately following the Diploma or sometime in the future. 
 
 Postgraduate Certificate 
 
 This Postgraduate Certificate is worth 60 credits. 
 Each class is based on around 200 hours of study over approximately 12 weeks. 
 You can expect to spend a minimum of 15 hours each week on various activities associated with the course. This may vary from student to student, depending on previour knowledge and experience along with individual learning styles.
  
 Compulsory classes 
 Benchmarking Safety & Risk Management 
  
  This class provides a context for safety and risk management practice in a wide variety of workplace environments. The standpoint adopted is one of developing the ability to benchmark safety and risk management within the overall management structure of the organisation. 
  You'll progress from this class with a common level of knowledge and understanding of key concepts and practice in safety and risk management, including health and safety legislation, safety policy and culture, risk assessment and human factors. 
 
 Assessing Hazards, Risks & Dangers 
  
  This class equips you to carry out a detailed assessment of the hazards, risks and dangers present in a range of workplace environments. The emphasis is on the interplay of work environment, people and work systems from which risks arise. 
  Based on a factual and practical account of typical risks in typical scenarios, you're encouraged to reflect on and generalise from these situations so that you can transfer your improved understanding to any workplace situation. 
 
 Optimising Safety & Risk Management Activities 
  
  Safety and risk management should be fully integrated into the organisation and the safety culture of the organisation developed accordingly. 
  This class focuses on developing a range of skills which will positively influence management and employees at all levels to achieve this strategic objective. 
  Within this class, data analysis and presentation techniques, loss control methods, effective networking and problem solving skills will be developed. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 This course is by distance learning only, delivered online via the University's Virtual Learning Environment, Myplace. Each stage of the programme is available with tutor support, providing students with an appropriate level of guidance, assessment and feedback. 
 