Course content 
 Core module 
 You'll study the following core modules: 
  
  International Human Rights Law 
  European Human Rights Law 
  Human Rights in Comparative Perspective 
  Human Rights Protection in the UK 
  
 Compulsory module 
  
  Legal Research (LLM /PgDiploma only) 
  
 Optional modules 
  
  Transitional Justice & Conflict Transformation 
  UK & EU Environmental Law 
  Equality Law 
  
 You may, with the consent of course directors, also choose a class from other Law Masters programmes and/or relevant classes from other non-law Masters programmes. Choices include classes from: 
  
  LLM/MSc Criminal Justice & Penal Change 
  MSc Mediation & Conflict Resolution   
  LLM in Internet Law & Policy 
  LLM in Construction Law 
  LLM in International Economic Law 
  LLM in International Law & Sustainable Development 
  
 European Human Rights Law
 
   The European Convention on Human Rights is the most influential regional human rights treaty. This class looks at the case law of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg and evaluates the substantive guarantees of the ECHR in areas such as fair trial, privacy and freedom of expression. 
 
 International Human Rights Law
  
  Human rights protection is a global concern. This class examines civil and political rights along with economic, social and cultural rights, and assesses the range of international monitoring and supervision regimes. Topics covered include the major international treaties and bodies. It also looks at the challenges to human rights in transitional societies as well as the right to self-determination. 
 
 Human Rights Protection in the UK
  
  The Human Rights Act 1998 is a major constitutional development in the UK. This class examines the on-going transformation in legal culture, the expansion in judicial power and the value of human rights litigation in achieving social change. 
 
 Human Rights in Comparative Perspective
  
  The proliferation of Bills of Rights in modern democracies has generated a variety of human rights standards as national courts adopt different approaches to rights conflicts. This class examines comparative perspectives on topical issues such as migrant protection. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 This course is taught mainly through face-to-face teaching. Each class is delivered through two-hour weekly seminars, which students are required to attend. 
 Full-time students are required to take three modules per semester, with part-time students taking three modules over two semesters. The face-to-face seminars will normally be held in the evening from 6pm to 8pm. A few classes may be held during the day. 
 The teaching and extra-curriculum activities on the LLM are supported by the Law School’s Centre for the Study of Human Rights. 
 In addition to regular Law School staff, external staff teach on the programme including: 
  
  Alan Miller﻿,  the current Chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission 
  Tony Kelly, a prolific human rights lawyer 
  
 Both are visiting professors in the Law School. Our faculty also includes experts in human rights and transitional justice, immigration law, equality, employment and labour law. 
 