Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Research Skills
 
   The research skills class develops skills which are essential for work on the MLitt dissertation and for later doctoral research and careers outside academia, such as publishing or research work. The class examines what it means to do research, how to prepare a research proposal, and what examiners look for in dissertations and theses. Part of the this class also involves a series of seminars on key aspects of place and literature, designed as an introduction to the work and working practices of specialists in the school whose work connects with the Literature, Culture and Place research group. 
 
 Dissertation (MLitt only)
 
   You must complete a 15,000 word dissertation, which will account for 60 credits towards their MLitt degree. The dissertation is intended to test your capacity to devise and carry out an independent research project. You will receive some individual supervision, but the planning, research and writing of the dissertation is fundamentally your own responsibility. The dissertation offers you the opportunity further to explore issues of particular interest to you that you have encountered during the course. Dissertations should seek to make a scholarly contribution to the literary, historical and theoretical areas of enquiry that make up the MLitt in Literature, Culture and Place. 
 
 Elective classes
 Choose five from this list 
 The Discovery of Scotland: the Sublime & the Picturesque
  
  The class introduces you to what is perhaps the most important pioneering phase in the 'discovery' and representation of British landscapes and locations. You'll engage with texts and paintings that allow them to see how the representation of British landscape, and especially the landscapes of the Scottish Highlands, underwent a complete transformation in the eighteenth century under the influence of aesthetic developments.   You'll examine these main theoretical paradigms - the sublime and the picturesque - and develop the ability to see how these paradigms shape the representation of landscape in various kinds of written genres and the visual arts. 
 
 Visions of Suburbia: Interdisciplinary Representations, 1850 to 2000
  
  This class examines the impact that the development of suburban spaces has had on a range of literary and cultural genres. 
  In the period 1850-2000, suburbia came to dominate both the physical and imaginary landscapes of Britain. It produced new configurations of space (the suburban villa), new forms of community ('neighbourhood watch') and new social stereotypes (the 'desperate housewives'). We will consider how these developments intersected with the form and content of contemporary literature, cinema, music and journalism by focusing on a series of key historical moments. Throughout we will maintain an interdisciplinary approach that seeks to uncover the mutual influences between the arts and the built environment, for example by tracing the influence of literary works on political, artistic and architectural writing on suburbia. 
 
 British Places: Literature 1880 to 1950
  
  This class studies the changing representation of national culture in literature in the British Isles in the first half of the twentieth century. The class aims to enhance the general themes of the MLitt in Literature, Culture and Place by investigating the way nation and place are constructed in literature at times of national emergency - during, in the particular cases studied here, two world wars, the agricultural depression of the 1880s, the industrial slump of the 1930s, and the emergence of Scottish and Irish nationalism.   
 
 Post-colonial Canadian Literature
 
   This class will explore the development and diversity of Canadian writing in English over the course of the twentieth century, and discuss the processes by which national and regional literatures are constructed. You'll consider the narrative strategies which writers use to engage with Canada's geography and history, and will analyse the politics of literary representations of colonial and postcolonial encounter, of wilderness, and of diasporic and multi-ethnic communities. Seminars will also examine the cultural links which emigrants have established between Canada and other countries (particularly Scotland). 
 
 Contemporary Scottish Cultural Studies
 
   This class will provide you with a knowledge of some of the main developments in Scottish cultural practice and Scottish Studies in the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Working with key Scottish and international texts, students will gain an understanding of the relationships between literature, film and theories of nationalism. 
 
 Travellin’ Blues: Literature, Politics & Displacement
 
   This class explores politics, culture and displacement in American and European literature, 1850-1950. The main context for this class will be the early years of the twentieth century and the interwar period, with a focus on a range of writers including Jack London, W.H. Davies, Woody Guthrie, B. Traven, George Orwell, and Jean Genet. The course examines the experience and representation of travel and displacement through the variously configured image of the vagabond and its relationship to the style and politics of various writers of the Modernist period. 
 
 Romanticism & the South West
  
  This class explores the literature of the early Romantic period, a large proportion of which was conceived and/or produced in the south west – particularly Bristol. In that city William Wordsworth met for the first time Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Robert Southey, and Joseph Cottle in September 1795. All would play an important role in the production of Lyrical Ballads in 1798. The central concerns of this module will be to consider why, and how, Bristol and the south west came to be so important in the development of English Romanticism. You'll read works written or published in the area by writers including William and Dorothy Wordsworth, Coleridge, Cottle, and Southey, as well as their literary forbears Thomas Chatterton and Ann Yearsley, and some of the inheritors of their literary legacy, William Hazlitt (who first met Wordsworth in Devon) and Robert Bloomfield. They will consider the relationship between labouring-class identity, rusticity, provincialism, and poetic or artistic ‘truth’ – all key concerns of Wordsworth and Coleridge in Lyrical Ballads. 
 
 Women Writers of the Anglo & Italospheres in the Long 19th Century
 
   The class considers the literary production of women writers from America, England and Italy during the Long Nineteenth Century. Women writers emerged on the literary scene during the late 1700s in England and America, but it was not until the late nineteenth century in Italy that the woman writer as novelist and journalist started writing for a growing readership. Her rise in popularity was facilitated by rapid industrialization and the expansion of the press, and contemporary male writers held her in high regard. The course will expand previously encountered studies by students of British and American women’s writing in the nineteenth century and locate them in a dynamic and fresh new context of Italian and European literature between 1789 and 1914, focusing on the importance of Italy and the idea of Italy for various strands of women’s writing.