Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Postgraduate Certificate & Postgraduate Diploma 
 Conceptual Frameworks in Autism
 
   This class will introduce key conceptual frameworks in relation to understanding the impact of the spectrum of autism. Focus will be given to the uniquely differing social, emotional, sensory and cognitive profiles for those with an ASD. Understanding these conceptual frameworks will enable participants to reflect on how and why these influence and inform practice. 
 
 The Spectrum of Autism
  
  You'll consider the issues that impact on practice when supporting individuals with an ASD with and without an additional intellectual or learning disability.     
 
 Responding to the Impact of Autism: Approaches and Interventions
 
   You'll consider the broad range of approaches to intervention, their application and theoretical basis and practical stance. A range of approaches will be systematically reviewed in relation to key features of their application, functional focus of the approach, the personal or interpersonal focus of the approach and the social context of the approach. 
  
 Postgraduate Diploma  
 Emotional Wellbeing
 
   This class  is concerned with both theoretical and practical issues of understanding and responding to the emotional needs and resulting distress that having an ASD can cause and the stress it places on the individual. 
 
 Elective classes 
 Postgraduate Diploma 
 Becoming a Trainer
 
   This class is concerned with both theoretical and practical issues of understanding the importance of raising standards in ASD training and the impact this can have for the individual with ASD, their carers and the service provider. 
 
 Counselling Skills in Autism
 
   This class  provides an opportunity for those working in the field of ASD to develop their understanding and awareness of the relevance of counselling skills to their work with parents and carers and people on the autism spectrum. In addition it seeks to provide opportunities for participants to develop their individual competence in offering active listening skills to others, pre-therapy skills and counselling skills. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is available on a full-time, part-time and distance learning basis. 
 Campus-based modules are taught one evening each week during term time. 
 Online learning involves attendance at an induction day after which learning is web-based. 
 