Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 People, Organisation & Technology
 
   This class aims to introduce you to the “softer” aspects of change management. In other classes you will have learned how to identify areas for improvement in organisations, tools and techniques to model organisations and to implement change. This class complements these things and looks at the human implications of change. 
 
 Industrial Group Project
 
   This class aims for you to integrate and apply course relevant knowledge in engineering design, mechatronics and automation, manufacture, and engineering management, to an industry-based project. 
 
 Postgraduate Individual Project
 
   The aim of the individual project is to allow you to combine the skills learned in other classes and apply them within a significant project in a specific area of design, manufacture, or engineering management. This will be achieved through you carrying out work into a particular topic relating to their course and preparing a dissertation that documents the project. 
 
 Management Of Total Quality & Continuous Improvement
 
   To provide you with an in-depth understanding of the main principles, concepts, tools and techniques of quality management and continuous improvement together with an awareness of how in practice these could be integrated to design and deliver an integrated continuous improvement programme.
  
  This class is run as a self-directed learning module where the formal lectures are replaced by comprehensive e-learning materials and a detailed learning programme. The learning is supported through comprehensive tutorials. 
 
 Fundamentals Of Lean Six Sigma
  
  The objective of this class is to introduce the participants to the principles of Lean Six Sigma thinking, tools and techniques of Lean Six Sigma and understand the wider implications of the broader strategic issues of organisation management and how they impact on continuous improvement programme. 
  On completion of the class you should be able to understand the theory and practical application of Lean Six Sigma methodologies within a holistic process improvement framework. This will enable their businesses to become more efficient, cost effective and much more profit oriented in today’s competitive marketplace. 
 
 Systems Thinking & Modelling
 
   The objective of this class is to introduce you to the theories and principles behind systems thinking. The class will also introduce you to the methods, tools and techniques for modelling, analysing, improving and designing systems in a variety of organisations, including industrial, commercial and public sector. 
 
 Design Of Experiments For Process Optimisation
 
   This class aims to introduce you to how to statistically plan, design and execute industrial experiments for process understanding and improvement in both manufacturing and service environments. 
 
 Quantitative Business Analysis
  
  The analysis of data and development of empirical models plays a vital role in business analysis and operational research. This class   will provide a basis for you to learn a range of widely used methods ranging from effective presentation of data to development of sophisticated statistical models.Quantitative Business Analysis runs over one semester but in two parts. The first part provides an introduction to the basic theory and application of statistical modelling. Topics covered include: 
   
   data analysis 
   probability theory 
   distributions and moments 
   estimation 
   hypothesis testing 
   
  The second part focuses mainly on two areas - regression modelling and multivariate analysis. 
  While key background theory will be presented, the emphasis is on the generation and interpretation of output from commercially available software. Throughout, there is an emphasis on the use of statistical analysis to help support decision-making and the management of business and industrial problems. Cases are used to illustrate topical issues. 
 
 Elective classes
 Choose two from this list 
 Supply Chain Operations
  
  The class aims to provide you with an in-depth knowledge and understanding of those key concepts, methods, tools and techniques that are fundamental to effective and efficient running of supply chain operations from suppliers’ suppliers to customers’ customers. 
  On completion you'll be able to design and manage operational supply chain planning, monitoring and control systems for complex and disparate operations. 
 
 Service Operations Management
  
 
 Advanced Project Management
  
  
 Learning & teaching 
 For the Masters project, you’ll have the opportunity to select a thesis topic and supervisor from the wide range of experts in: 
  
  process excellence 
  operations management 
  quality management 
  
 