Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Semester 1 
 Principles of Research Design
  
  This class enables you to evaluate alternative research designs and formulate appropriate research proposals. 
 
 Quantitative Methods I
  
  This class covers  methodology and measurement in social science research. 
  
 Semester 2 
 Qualitative Methods
  
  This class introduces qualitative research design and the range of qualitative techniques available for research. Both computer-based and other approaches are employed. 
 
 Quantitative Methods II
  
  This class will look at statistical tools that enable you to interpret social scientific data sensitively and sensibly. 
 
 Elective classes
 Choose two classes. 
 Elective Classes 
  
  These may include:﻿ 
   
   Policy Analysis 
   Comparative Public Policy 
   International Institutions and Regimes 
   Contesting Global Governance 
   European Governance 
   European Political Economy﻿ 
   
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The MSc in Political Research is designed not only to give you research skills, but also to enhance your ability to choose appropriate research methods and confront the issues of research design. The course is organised into core and optional classes. You'll also complete a dissertation. 
 You receive training with a strong empirical focus, and supervision in small-group seminars and in individual sessions  You’ll receive considerable time and attention from our staff. 
 Classes average 20 contact hours, with additional computer laboratory sessions for some methods classes.   
 Part-time students attend classes across two academic years. They then work on their dissertation over the course of 10 months.﻿﻿﻿ 
 Indicative readings 
  
  Berg, B.L. (2004).Qualitative Research Methods for the Social Sciences. Pearson 
  Box-Steffensmeier, J.M., Brady, H.F. and Collier, D. (2008). The Oxford Handbook of Political Methodology. Oxford University Press 
  Gerring, J. (2012). Social Science Methodology: A Unified Framework. Cambridge University Press 
  King, G., Keohane, R. and Verba, S. (1994). Designing Social Inquiry. Princeton University Press 
  
 