Course content 
 Semester 1 - Module 1: Mental Health Officer Theory and Practice 1 (L5962) 
 This module enables candidates to apply critical knowledge and understanding of mental health and wellbeing and mental disorders. 
 You'll also be able to make a comprehensive assessment of complex need and manage risk within the relevant legislative and policy frameworks in collaboration with other disciplines and organisations.   
 Candidates will also be able to demonstrate ethical and professional practice in performing the role and task of an MHO within a multi-disciplinary framework. 
 Semester 2 - Module 2: Mental Health Officer Theory and Practice 2 (L5963) 
 Candidates will apply critical knowledge and understanding of mental wellbeing and mental disorders to the potential outcomes for vulnerable people at risk of being subject to the powers of the relevant legislation. 
 You'll apply lawful interpretations of capacity and incapacity evidence knowledge and understanding of mental disorder in relation to offending behaviour, in work with mentally disordered people in the criminal justice system and address the rights of that individual and others involved in complex statutory processes within a multi-disciplinary framework. 
 ﻿ 
 Learning & teaching 
 You need to attend for 30 days of direct teaching/contact time during term time. Additional work and self-directed learning will be completed as directed. You’ll also be required to undertake programme-directed assessed practice learning in each module. 
 You'll need to commit to a minimum of 600 hours of study, practice learning and assessment within an academic year. 
 You’re required to attend these sessions during term-time and to have agreed study time outwith term-time to complete the course. 
 The course content is provided through a range of teaching approaches including direct learning, directed learning and independent learning as well as the practice experience. 
 As the course is preparing candidates for a complex role in practice much of the focus is on ensuring candidates are able to directly apply the knowledge from lecturers and directed learning (specified reading) into practice, therefore skills workshops are an integral part of the course content. 
 In addition, open book exams on the law and less formal approaches to testing knowledge, eg group quiz activity are also used.   Role-play is also used to expose the candidates to the formal tribunal hearing setting within, which they will practice following completion of the award. 
 Candidates are provided with personal tutors to guide their journey through the course and to support them with any pastoral issues, which may arise during the course.   
 Guest lectures 
 A number of external specialists provide input to the course. A significant amount of the course relates to the powers and duties afforded to local authorities, the NHS and MHOs to provide care and treatment for those experiencing mental health problems. Specialist input, therefore, includes: 
  
  medical staff, including psychiatrists and psychologists 
  lawyers 
  representative organisations such as the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland and the Mental Health Tribunal Service 
  currently practising MHOs provide skills workshops 
  
 Service users and carers also provide input to the course both as guest lecturers and by contributing to the design of the course content. 
 