Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Global Energy Issues, Industries & Markets
  
  You'll examine the structures and trends in global energy markets. Demand and supply of the various types of energy such as coal, oil, natural gas, nuclear and renewables is covered along with a discussion of electricity markets. Topics of relevance for the energy professional, such as the interaction between energy and the environment (including carbon markets) and energy futures and options markets are discussed. 
 
 Global Energy Technologies, Impacts & Implementation
 
   Considers the technical and policy context surrounding the adoption and deployment of energy technologies worldwide.   You'll cover both fossil fuel and low carbon technologies, their fit to particular circumstances, and the main stages and issues in implementing energy projects. 
 
 Global Energy Policy, Politics, Business Structures & Finance
  
  Policy is how Governments turn their desires into reality.   Many decisions about energy are essentially political and require policy makers to balance objectives (such as energy security, cost, environmental impacts, and economic growth) within a wider global context. 
  You'll consider the issues faced by governments, citizens and businesses and how policy options are assessed and put into practice.   You'll put your learning into practice, working in groups to develop innovative national energy policy proposals. 
 
 Global Energy Forum
  
  You'll get the chance to hear experts speak from a wide variety of backgrounds and organisations. Through presentations on critical and timely topics, you'll come to understand what outside experts are thinking and doing about important energy issues. You'll also have the opportunity to undertake field trips to relevant sites. 
     
 
 Optional classes: selection 1
 Choose 1 
 Energy Economics
  
  The module explores key economic issues at the heart of topical energy questions. The module covers 
   
   the objectives of energy policy 
   private and social perspectives on energy supply and demand 
   regulation using relevant examples (including North Sea activity and renewable electricity) 
   economic models to understand interactions between energy and the economy 
   
 
 Environmental Economics
  
 
 Optional classes: selection 2
 Choose 1 
 Microeconomics
  
  This is designed to be accessible if you have no prior expertise in economics. 
  It is focused on economic literacy with a clear emphasis on the application to contemporary issues in the real world.   Knowledge of these topics provides the foundation for further study in a broad range of topics in Economics. 
 
 Macroeconomics
 
   By the end of the class you'll be able to assess the information content in the behaviour of key macroeconomic variables; discuss their implications for business managers. You'll understand the objectives and challenges in the design and operation of macroeconomic policies and explain how policy impacts on the macroeconomic environment. 
 
 Elective classes 
 Elective classes
  
  You’ll be able to choose from many postgraduate classes offered in: 
   
   The Strathclyde Business School 
   The Faculty of Engineering 
   The Faculty of Humanities & Social Sciences 
   
  
 Learning & teaching 
 You’ll be taught by highly committed and enthusiastic staff distinguished by their internationally-recognised research in energy and environmental related fields. 
 The course offers excellent opportunities to network with international energy specialists from a range of organisations.