Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Educational & Social Research & Enquiry
  
  This class is designed to introduce researchers to the major intellectual traditions which may be used to structure the formulation of research questions in educational & social research. 
  It will introduce you to the basic assumptions and analytic moves of positivist/realist research, of qualitative/hermeneutic research and of critical/discourse analytic research. It will also introduce you to the use of literature in developing research questions and to competing approaches to the nature of ‘ethics’ in social research. 
 
 Design Strategies in Educational & Social Research
  
  This class is designed to introduce researchers to fundamental considerations regarding the design of educational & social research and is concerned with research strategy. 
  It's informed by the broad philosophical and research traditions explored in Education & Social Research & Enquiry and builds on the formulation of research questions achieved through that class. While Education & Social Research & Enquiry deals with overall research strategy, it provides the basis for the more detailed consideration of specific techniques of data collection to be undertaken in Data Collection in Educational & Social Research. 
 
 Data Collection in Educational & Social Research
 
   This class will provide you with a comprehensive and in-depth introduction to data collection procedures, across the main traditions in educational and social research. It's concerned with the full range of techniques of data collection associated with both qualitative and quantitative approaches. 
 
 Data Analysis in Educational & Social Research
  
  You'll understand the importance of identifying appropriate analytic techniques before data are collected. You'll also be aware of the limits of the claims which can be made on the grounds of data analytic techniques. 
  Through reflecting upon outcomes and implications of analyses across a range of studies within an education/social context, you'll gain a deeper understanding of the potential for practice development through Applied Educational & Social Research. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is delivered through the web, giving you access to a range of interactive course materials including audio clips and video. 
 You can use live chat and discussion threads to work with the other students and course tutors. 
 