Course content 
 Successful completion of eight instructional modules and a group project leads to the award of a Postgraduate Diploma. 
 Successful completion of eight modules, a group project and individual project leads to the award of an MSc. 
 Compulsory classes 
 Sustainability
  
 
 People, Organisation & Technology
 
   This class aims to introduce you to the “softer” aspects of change management. In other classes you will have learned how to identify areas for improvement in organisations, tools and techniques to model organisations and to implement change. This class complements these things and looks at the human implications of change. 
 
 Strategic Technology Management
 
   This class aims to provide you with a high-level understanding and knowledge of the role of technology in business strategy for maintaining market competitiveness. 
 
 Industrial Group Project
 
   This class aims for you to integrate and apply course relevant knowledge in engineering design, mechatronics and automation, manufacture, and engineering management, to an industry-based project. 
 
 Postgraduate Individual Project
 
   The aim of the individual project is to allow you to combine the skills learned in other classes and apply them within a significant project in a specific area of design, manufacture, or engineering management. This will be achieved through you carrying out work into a particular topic relating to their course and preparing a dissertation that documents the project. 
 
 Engineering Risk Management
 
   This class aims to enable you to understand the basic principles and techniques of engineering risk management and demonstrate the appropriate application of this knowledge within an engineering context. 
 
 Management Of Total Quality & Continuous Improvement
 
   To provide you with an in-depth understanding of the main principles, concepts, tools and techniques of quality management and continuous improvement together with an awareness of how in practice these could be integrated to design and deliver an integrated continuous improvement programme.
  
  This class is run as a self-directed learning module where the formal lectures are replaced by comprehensive e-learning materials and a detailed learning programme. The learning is supported through comprehensive tutorials. 
 
 Advanced Project Management
  
 
 Elective classes
 Choose one from this list 
 Supply Chain Operations
  
  The class aims to provide you with an in-depth knowledge and understanding of those key concepts, methods, tools and techniques that are fundamental to effective and efficient running of supply chain operations from suppliers’ suppliers to customers’ customers. 
  On completion you'll be able to design and manage operational supply chain planning, monitoring and control systems for complex and disparate operations. 
 
 Fundamentals Of Lean Six Sigma
  
  The objective of this class is to introduce the participants to the principles of Lean Six Sigma thinking, tools and techniques of Lean Six Sigma and understand the wider implications of the broader strategic issues of organisation management and how they impact on continuous improvement programme. 
  On completion of the class you should be able to understand the theory and practical application of Lean Six Sigma methodologies within a holistic process improvement framework. This will enable their businesses to become more efficient, cost effective and much more profit oriented in today’s competitive marketplace. 
 
 Systems Thinking & Modelling
 
   The objective of this class is to introduce you to the theories and principles behind systems thinking. The class will also introduce you to the methods, tools and techniques for modelling, analysing, improving and designing systems in a variety of organisations, including industrial, commercial and public sector. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 This course is delivered through a balanced mix of lectures, tutorials and project works. Emphasis is placed on the industrial team project that brings you in contact with industry. Industrial contacts are regularly invited to present based on their experience. 
 