Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Semester 1 
 Comparative Public Policy
  
  This class assesses the existing theories, concepts and approaches in the field of comparative public policy research, as well as analysing contemporary developments in the field. 
  
 Semester 2 
 Policy Analysis
  
  This class examines the theoretical, practical and ethical issues involved in conducting policy analysis, both research of policy and the policy process, and research designed to be used in the policy process. 
  
 You'll choose two classes from the following: 
 Principles of Research Design - Semester 1
  
  This class enables you to evaluate alternative research designs and formulate appropriate research proposals. 
 
 Quantitative Methods I - Semester 1
  
  The classes covers methodology and measurement in social science research. 
 
 Quantitative Methods II - Semester 2
  
  The module will look at statistical tools that enable you to interpret social scientific data sensitively and sensibly. 
 
 Qualitative Methods - Semester 2
  
  This module introduces qualitative research design and the range of qualitative techniques available for research. Both computer-based and other approaches are used. 
 
 Elective classes
 Choose two classes. 
 Elective classes
  
  These may include:﻿ 
   
   European Governance 
   European Political Economy 
   Contesting Global Governance 
   International Institutions and Regimes 
   Principles of Research Design (if not taken as core) 
   Quantitative Methods I (if not taken as core) 
   Quantitative Methods II (if not taken as core) 
   Qualitative Methods (if not taken as core) 
   
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The MSc in Public Policy comprises of core and optional classes and a dissertation. The core classes provide an introduction to the theory and practice of public policy, as well as a range of skills and methodologies relevant to designing, conducting and reporting on social research. 
 All classes are taught in small-group seminars. You’ll receive considerable time and attention from our staff in the seminars and individual supervision sessions. 
 If you’re studying part-time you’ll attend classes across two academic years. You’ll work on a dissertation over 10 months. 
 Classes average 20 contact hours, with additional computer laboratory sessions for some methods classes.  Part-time students attend classes across two academic years. They then work on their dissertation over the course of 10 months. 
 Indicative readings 
  
  Cariney, P. (2012) Understanding Public Policy. Basingstoke: Palgrave. 
  Dodds, A. (2013) Comparitive Public Policy. Basingstoke: Palgrave. 
  Sabatier, P. & Weible, C. (ed) (2014) Theories of the Policy Processes. 3rd ed. Boulder: Westview Press. 
  
 