Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
  
 Expand AllCollapse All-->
 HRM in a Business Context
  
  This class aims to explore the managerial and business context of HRM and the associated impact in shaping human resource strategy. 
  It critically reviews the major internal and external contextual factors influencing organisational strategy and examines the key choices facing HR managers in designing and delivery of HR practices. 
  The class recognises that HRM occurs in a variety of organisational, social and political contexts and evaluates the significance of these variations for the strategic organisation and management of people. Fundamentally the class examines how organisational and HR strategies are shaped by the dynamic nature of the business context, the underpinning goals of employers and considerations of social and ethical legitimacy. 
 
 Global Staffing
  
  This class is primarily focused on human resource management within multinational companies providing a broad base to understand how companies address the challenges of managing globally. 
  The class focuses on key challenges in staffing the multinational enterprise considering aspects such as recruitment and selection, training and development, compensation and performance management. The firm-level analysis will complement the broader comparative frameworks which other modules are developing to allow for you to further your understanding of comparative HRM and issues surrounding the globalisation of business. 
 
 Business Systems
  
  
   This class focuses on comparative political economy and the variety of business systems that frame and shape employment policies and practices at firm and state level.
   
  
   The class looks at the structures, strategies and practices of the transnational firm, and their consequences for employment relations. This is then linked to the now extensive debates about the character and scope of globalisation and global flows of goods and labour. Bringing these two themes together, the class   will examine in detail theory and practices of global value chains and production networks with respect to labour issues. The consequences of these dynamics for policy making with respect to corporate governance and responsibility will provide an additional practical focus.
   
 
 Comparative Employment Relations
 
   The aim of this class will be to examine current issues in the field of comparative employment relations including from a political economy perspective and to outline and examine comparative employment relations in the context of the international political economy together with the strategies and practices utilised by international firms. The class will also analyse comparative employment relations from a range of social and institutional perspectives and from a range of distinct environments. 
 
 Labour & Diversity in a Global Context
 
   This class will provide you with the opportunity to explore patterns of labour mobility across nation states and how these have varied across space and time. A key focus will be on the issue of diversity management within and between nation states in an era of more integrated markets and the practical implications these have for managers working in different political and economic contexts. 
 
 Research Methods for HR Professionals
 
   Designed to increase critical awareness of the ways in which research in social science practice relates to theories of research methods, this class is concerned with exploring the strengths and weaknesses of particular research designs and techniques relevant to human resource issues and developments. You'll be equipped with the ability to design and execute methodologically rigorous research projects. 
 
 Elective classes
 Choose two from this list 
 Employee Relations
  
  This class will provide a critical understanding of current developments in employee relations in the UK. 
  You'll learn about the dynamics and shape of the employment relationship with particular attention focussed on exploring the resilience of the traditional institutions and modes of employment regulation, as well as exploring current attempts to recast the dynamics of employee relations. 
 
 Employee Reward
 
   You'll become familiar with different pay systems and structures and will develop an understanding of the interdisciplinary nature of the foundations of pay in this module, enabling you to develop a critical understanding of pay systems and structures. 
 
 People Resourcing
 
   This class will help you understand people resourcing issues within organisations and related concepts in order that they become thinking practitioners in the field. Issues such as managing performance, managing equality and managing careers will be covered. 
 
 Human Resource Development
  
  This class provides you with a comprehensive view of the field of human resource development, learning and change for individuals and organisations. 
  The class considers theories and practice in the management of workplace learning and development. We encourage the development of a critical view of HRD theory and practice, to develop your capabilities as HR professionals in work and employment. HR professionals who are able to think critically about HRD are better problem-solvers and decision-makers, on the broader social implications of changes taking place in organisations and the challenges these changes pose to HRD. 
 
 Employment Issues & the Law
 
   Employment law plays a role in shaping the work of personnel specialists. You'll be introduced to important aspects of UK employment law with the aim of examining the nature and extent of its impact on employment relationships, policies and practices, and will gain knowledge of the way in which employment law is formed through European UK legislation and directives. 
  
 