Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Advanced Boiler Technologies 1
  
  This module provides core knowledge of the modern conventional power plant boiler and enables students to develop a critical awareness of the operation, design and integration of the key components that comprise a boiler system. 
 
 Advanced Boiler Technologies 2
  
  Pressurised systems are inherently dangerous since they contain stored energy which must be carefully controlled. The module sets down a methodology whereby a range of pressurised components (spheres, cylinders, cones, etc.) can be designed, manufactured, installed and operated to a high degree of safety. Topics include the design of the boiler, associated equipment and piping systems. 
 
 Electrical Power Systems
  
  This module provides students with an understanding of the operation of modern electrical power systems featuring renewable and low carbon generation, along with the techniques to undertake a basic technical analysis of key electrical devices and systems. 
 
 Materials for Power Plant
  
  This module gives students a thorough introduction to the materials science and metallurgy that underpins the design of power plant. This will build on basic concepts to give an appreciation for the theory of alloy design and strengthening mechanisms, including an understanding of the importance of fracture and creep. 
 
 Environmental Performance & Related Technologies
  
  The aim of this module is to gain knowledge of the new technologies available to mitigate potential environmental impacts. 
  The module will teach the following: 
   
   the impacts of pollutants from the energy industry on atmospheric physical and chemical structure 
   the structure of the global energy industry and economics 
   coal conversion technologies and the selection of different coals 
   a description of technologies that limit the emission of environmentally harmful pollutants and how regulation impacts this 
   
 
 Energy Resources & Policy
  
  Against the background of international commitments on atmospheric emissions, diminishing fossil fuel resources, renewable energy systems deployment and the liberalisation of energy markets, this module examines sustainable options for energy production, supply and consumption. The aim is to give students an understanding of current trends in the energy market, and to enable a critical evaluation of emerging ideas, technologies and policies especially in relation to new and renewable energy supply systems. 
 
 Gas & Steam Turbines
  
  This module gives students an advanced knowledge of applications of both steam and gas turbines within the power generation industry. The module includes details of power-plants that have been developed specifically to integrate gas turbines such as (gas turbine exhaust gas) heat recovery steam generators (HRSGs) used in combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) plants. 
 
 Power Plant Systems
  
 
 Nuclear Power Systems
  
 
 Elective classes 
 Design Management
  
  This module provides a structured introduction to the Design Management process, issues and tools. Topics include Integrated Product Development, and the different approaches and aspects to design development including concurrent engineering, team engineering, product management, design management, distributed design, and decision support. Other topics cover the design activity, team and management organisational structures, key issues concerning design complexity, and design performance and innovation. 
 
 Information Management 
  
  This module gives students an understanding of the types of different approaches, techniques and systems used in building information based systems. Topics include the software engineering process, requirements specification, visual modelling and an understanding of information storage and retrieval systems. 
 
 Project Management 
  
  This module provides students with skills relating to the use of engineering practices in Project Management with particular respect to the effective and efficient use of resources. The syllabus includes an introduction to project management techniques and project control, project networks including critical path analysis, procedural and graphical presentation techniques, an introduction to Contract Law and project budgetary control. 
 
 Risk Management
  
  Under Health and Safety legislation, and under the wider European Post-Seveso Directives, it is mandatory for many industries to carry out risk assessments with the aim of showing that risk is As Low As Reasonably Practicable. This module introduces the fundamental techniques of risk analysis and risk-informed decision making. Students will learn the general principles of methods and their place in risk management, as well as the chance to develop skills in applying these methods to variety of engineering examples. 
 
 Financial Engineering
  
  This module introduces elements of financial engineering that are applied to reduce risk of business insolvency and enhance the financial robustness of business enterprises. Questions addressed include: What is the best strategy for survival and growth?; What are the options for financing investment projects both in the private and public sectors of an economy?; How would the financial engineer propose to combine loan capital and equity capital to raise funds for an investment initiative; How would he/she advise his/her company/organization to build its investment portfolio to ensure financial security in volatile market conditions? 
 
 Sustainability
  
  This module provides students with an understanding of the concepts of sustainability and sustainable development. The social, environmental, and economic impact of development strategies will be identified and the mitigation of negative impacts discussed. Topics covered include shifting world views with respect to technology and ecology, green politics, climate change, sustainable development and limits to growth. 
 
 Individual project
 
 For MSc students after taught modules are successfully passed.
  
 Individual project
  
  In this part of the course, students undertake supervised, individual project work, with the award of MSc being made on the basis of an acceptable thesis submission. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 Students take three compulsory modules and a selection of specialist and generic modules. 
 To qualify for the MSc, students undertake an individual project which allows study of a selected topic in depth, normally industry-themed or aligned to engineering research at Strathclyde. 
 