Course content 
 Classes
 Please note that the timetable for classes may be subject to change. Classes taken include: 
 Semester 1 
 The Reflective Practioner
  
  This class aims to develop the managerial capabilities through developing student’s skills as reflective learners by enabling them to analyse their learning processes and ensuring that they appreciate core aspects of self-awareness and can effectively interact with others. 
  Collaborative learning – between students and between students and staff – is central to this class. It uses a mix of experiential elements and more traditional learning approaches, as is appropriate for the subject matter covered. 
 
 People Resourcing
 
   This class will help you understand people resourcing issues within organisations and related concepts in order that they become thinking practitioners in the field. Issues such as managing performance, managing equality and managing careers will be covered. 
 
 Semester 2 
 HRM in a Business Context
  
  This class aims to explore the managerial and business context of HRM and the associated impact in shaping human resource strategy. 
  It critically reviews the major internal and external contextual factors influencing organisational strategy and examines the key choices facing HR managers in designing and delivery of HR practices. 
  The class recognises that HRM occurs in a variety of organisational, social and political contexts and evaluates the significance of these variations for the strategic organisation and management of people.   
 
 Managing People in Organisations
  
  This class aims to facilitate students develop the knowledge about Organisational Behaviour/Human Resource Management that general managers need when working in current business/organisational situations. 
  In addition, the course will provide an understanding of modern organisations in terms of the management of people, the strategies and processes of Human Resource Management, and to provide the basis for a critical review of human resource systems and techniques. 
 
 Semester 3 
 Research Methods for HR Professionals
 
   Designed to increase critical awareness of the ways in which research in social science practice relates to theories of research methods, this class is concerned with exploring the strengths and weaknesses of particular research designs and techniques relevant to human resource issues and developments. You'll be equipped with the ability to design and execute methodologically rigorous research projects. 
 
 Human Resource Development
  
  This class provides you with a comprehensive view of the field of human resource development, learning and change for individuals and organisations. 
  The class considers theories and practice in the management of workplace learning and development. We encourage the development of a critical view of HRD theory and practice, to develop your capabilities as HR professionals in work and employment. HR professionals who are able to think critically about HRD are better problem-solvers and decision-makers, on the broader social implications of changes taking place in organisations and the challenges these changes pose to HRD. 
 
 Semester 4 
 Global Staffing
  
  This class is primarily focused on human resource management within multinational companies providing a broad base to understand how companies address the challenges of managing globally. 
  The class focuses on key challenges in staffing the multinational enterprise considering aspects such as recruitment and selection, training and development, compensation and performance management. The firm-level analysis will complement the broader comparative frameworks which other modules are developing to allow for you to further your understanding of comparative HRM and issues surrounding the globalisation of business. 
 
 Managing Talent & Succession Planning
  
  This class will provide students with access to a dynamic area of growing importance to both specialist HR Managers and those in operational and executive positions of responsibility. 
  Talent Management draws on a range of HR themes (recruitment, selection, training, development, rewards, leadership) and places these in a strategic context, with further relatedness to ethical and cultural concerns. 
  This module will also provide students with a practical, business-oriented understanding of talent and talent management while, at the same time, providing a platform for critical engagement with the challenges and issues associated with talent management. 
 
 Semesters 3 & 4 
 Dissertation
  
  The MSc Dissertation is a substantial piece of academic work. It will undoubtedly be the most in-depth, academically rigorous and challenging piece of work of the programme. 
  As such it provides students with the opportunity to illustrate their understanding of HRM with greater breadth and depth. 
  The dissertation also provides the opportunity to demonstrate qualities of scholarship; such as the discriminating use of reading and engagement with prevailing academic debates; the generation of empirical data; and the presentation of well researched, coherent and well supported analysis. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 Learning methods used over the course will include a mixture of: 
  
  Face-to-face lecturing when introducing new concepts and theories –delivered by full-time Strathclyde faculty or Strathclyde-appointed adjunct faculty 
  Tutorials to reinforce, apply and develop key concepts and communication skills – generally given by local tutors appointed in consultation with Strathclyde 
  Workshops to develop key analysis and application skills – delivered by both Strathclyde and local tutors as well as visiting speakers/ specialists 
  
 