Course content 
 Semester 1 
 Global Cities: Society & Sustainability 
 
   Designed to allow you to develop your understanding of the wider social, environmental and economic systems upon which cities depend and expand their knowledge of the contemporary challenges, faced in delivering solutions for sustainability in complex urban environments. 
 
 Leadership Skills for Urban Change (part 1)
 
   Prepares you with the professional skill-set required to implement change and deliver viable city solutions in challenging working environments. Key skills include: 
   
   leadership approaches 
   project management 
   decision-making 
   negotiating 
   influencing 
   communication 
   This class is carried out over two semesters. 
 
  City Systems & Infrastructure 
 
   Provides you with a comprehensive understanding of the complex and interrelated systems upon which cities depend, whilst developing knowledge of urban processes, technologies and infrastructure options for sustainable cities. 
 
 Understanding & Modelling Cities (part 1)
  
  Provides a working knowledge of the data systems, the application of analytical techniques and modelling tools which allow cities to be understood physically, economically, socially and environmentally. 
  This class is carried out over two semesters. 
 
 Public Policy, Governance & Strategic Change in Cities 
 
   Designed to develop understanding of urban political systems and the actors and drivers of change. You'll enhance your skills in analysing and implementing public policy that support growth and sustainability within urban environments. 
 
 Business Models, Financing & Urban Business Case Analysis
 
   Business opportunities have a significant role to play in transitioning towards sustainable cities. This class will enable you to develop your capabilities in evaluating and selecting business opportunities, developing alternative business models and using tools to assess the costs, impacts and risks of different financing and business strategies. 
  
 Semester 2 
 Urban Theory
  
  Allows you to take a critical perspective on the ways in which urban ideas, theories and approaches have responded to contextual conditions in time and how they have shaped human lives and the environment to the present day. Current urban challenges and how design and planning strategies can integrate wider social, environmental, political and economic policy objectives to achieve more sustainable urban environments will also be explored. 
 
 Understanding & Modelling Cities (part 2)
  
  Provides a working knowledge of the data systems, the application of analytical techniques and modelling tools which allow cities to be understood physically, economically, socially and environmentally. 
  This class is carried over two semesters. 
 
 Leadership Skills for Urban Change (part 2)
 
   Prepares you with the professional skill-set required to implement change and deliver viable city solutions in challenging working environments. Key skills include: 
   
   leadership approaches 
   project management 
   decision-making 
   negotiating 
   influencing 
   communication 
   
  This class is carried over both semesters. 
  
 Elective classes 
 Elective classes
  
  In addition to the core classes above, you'll study 4 classes from a wide range of electives. You're encouraged to select electives that allow you to pursue you individual interests and develop specialised skills relevant to your chosen career path. 
  Possible electives are available from a range of different departments within the university, including: 
   
   
 Strategy and Organisation 
 Management Science 
 Economics 
 Engineering 
 Architecture 
 Government & Public Policy 
 Law 
 Computer & Information Sciences 
 
   
  As classes are available from a wide range of departments, some may require previous experience in a relevant field. 
  Examples of electives highly relevant to themes covered in the MSc in Leadership for Global Sustainable Cities include: 
   
 
 Global Energy Policy, Politics, Business Structures & Finance 
 Business Strategy 
 Energy Systems 
 Environmental Business Strategy 
 Environmental Economics 
 Geographical Information Systems 
 Innovation 
 Entrepreneurship 
 Leadership for Change & Innovation 
 Project Management 
 Risk Analysis & Management 
 Strategic Decision Making 
 Strategic Technology Management 
 Sustainable Energy Governance 
 Urban Transport Planning 
 International Environmental Law 
 Design Management 
 Financial Engineering 
 Business Analytics 
 Strategic Financial Management 
 
   
  
 Summer term 
 Transformative Projects (work-based project)
 
   In place of a traditional dissertation, this module offers you the opportunity to undertake two challenging problem-focussed projects, allowing for the application of skills and learning within a professional working environment. Projects may be in the UK or overseas. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 In semester 1 and 2, the course is delivered through lectures, seminars, tutorials and skills-based workshops. In many of these core classes, there is also strong emphasis on group project work. 
 During the summer, you’ll undertake two project placements with different organisations – whether in industry, business, academia, government or other organisations working on urban sustainability problems and solutions. 
 Projects can be undertaken in the UK or overseas, and you’re encouraged to be pro-active in finding opportunities to work with organisations relevant to their future career ambitions. Guidance and support in finding suitable projects will be provided by university staff and periodic workshops and seminars during semesters 1 and 2 will assist you in preparing 
 