Course content In addition to the core classes, you'll have the opportunity to pursue elective classes from other Masters programmes in Law as well as related programmes across the University. 
 Compulsory classes 
 Legal Research
  
  This is offered by distance learning across both semesters. 
  The aim of the module is to help you enhance your research abilities and skills with a view to improving your performance in course.   
 
 World Trading Systems: Law & Policy
  
  
   This class will provide you with advanced instruction in the law of the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
   
  
   You'll explore the core rules of non-discrimination and most-favoured nation treatment which underpin many of the legal agreements comprising the WTO.
   
  
   The analysis will then move on to more specialised WTO agreements.
   
 
 International Environmental Law
  
  Climate change, biodiversity, deforestation are just some of the daunting global environmental challenges that the world is currently facing. 
  Most of these problems cannot be solved by one country alone. 
  Against this background, students in this module will discuss the international legal frameworks applicable to transboundary and international environmental problems.   
 
 Elective classes 
 Elective Classes
  
  Choices may include: 
   
   Comparative Law of Obligations 
   Business and Human Rights 
   Comparative Company Law and Regulation 
   Competition Law and Policy in the EU 
   Legal Process and the Law of Contract and Other Obligations (For non-lawyers) 
   UK and EU Environmental Law 
   Intellectual Property 
   Global Water Policy 
   International Trade Theory, Policy and Institutions 
   Fundamentals of Environmental Forensics 
   Energy Resources and Policy 
   
  Please note that the classes offered may change from year to year. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 As a general rule, classes taught within the Law School will normally be taught over a ten-week teaching period with one two-hour seminar per week.   
 However in some cases, classes will be offered intensively over a shorter time period because of the availability of staff teaching them.   
 