Course content 
 The modules studied in the MSc course are dependent on the needs of the individual student. This allows you to pick and choose modules to suit your own requirements and learning objectives. Each completed module provides 10 postgraduate credits, in total 180 credits are required to obtain an MSc degree. 
 You’ll study six modules in first year to make up 60 credits, and six modules again in second year. In your third year you’ll have to complete a 60-credit project, this will normally be undertaken in your workplace and will allow you to apply the knowledge developed in your first two years. 
 Classes
 
 The class descriptions are intended as a guide only. 
 Please be aware that although the general content and aim of the class will remain the same, there may be changes to some content and assessment as the lecturer will continually update and develop the class. 
 Classes may also become unavailable from time to time, either through staff changes, or lack of demand. You should read this in conjunction with the current course regulations and student handbook.
  
 Process Design Principles 
  
  The focus of this module is on the principles of conceptual design and flowsheet development. 
  You’ll focus on defining “design” and the associated terminology, and showing how this can be applied to equipment and process selection. You’ll also develop an understanding of the hierarchical and structural methods of developing conceptual designs including the effective design of utility systems to reduce energy use. 
 
 Advanced Process Design
  
  The focus of this module is on the wider implications of process design. 
  Firstly you’ll explore how batch and semi-batch processes are represented and described. 
  The second stage will look at the broader context or macro level in which process design takes place. 
  The third part of the module focuses on defining chemical product design and showing the similarities and differences between CPD and process design. 
 
 Safety Management Practices
  
  This module provides you with an advanced level exposure to the role of management and management systems in safety and loss prevention. 
  It will involve in-depth analysis of major incidents in recent history: pinpointing the structure of Safety Management Systems, approach to Auditing Safety Management, the role of Human Factors, and the process and concept of safe design. This course will also involve developing Site Emergency Plans and Accident Investigation skills, as well as a review of legal structure for the UK. 
 
 Programming & Optimisation 
  
  This module aims to provide you with a fundamental understanding of scientific programming. In particular, its application to optimisation in engineering applications. The module will teach you to: 
   
   develop algorithms to solve optimisation tasks 
   present working Excel spreadsheets tackling optimisation tasks in a form suitable for other engineers to use 
   
 
 Modelling & Simulation
  
  Modelling and Simulation involves the development and use of mathematical models in the design, analysis and operation of processes and process plant and equipment. This module aims to develop your understanding of: 
   
   the principles of model design and development using a range of modem computer based tools 
   the mathematical tools and techniques available to perform simulation and optimisation studies with models 
   
 
 Emerging Technologies
  
  This module is an introduction to key research areas across Chemical Engineering and Chemistry that are of industrial importance in the medium term. It will include a range of advanced technologies that support the innovation, design and development of processes that are more efficient, cleaner and have a reduced impact on the environment. 
 
 IPR Management
  
  The IPR management module (intellectual property rights management) will looks at: 
   
   the need to protect and/or gain optimum reward for the intellectual property generated in the organisation 
   the means by which protection and/or gain can be achieved 
   patent and trademark law 
   licensing and technology transfer 
   
 
 Process Safety Design
  
  This module looks at how the designs of chemical processes are influenced by standard control and alarm systems that ensure process safety. 
  The focus is on how to allow for transient events that occur during start-up/shutdown and process upsets. The course draws on various international design codes and current codes of practice used in the petrochemical and oil/gas exploration and processing industries. 
  Visiting Professors will introduce industrial case studies to highlight elements from the syllabus and demonstrate the learning outcomes of this module. 
 
 Environmental Engineering & Management
  
  Consideration of the environment is an important aspect of all process industries. This module will: 
   
   introduce you to the basic principles of environmental pollution and types and effects of various pollutants 
   introduce you to the principles and detailed design of various pollution control/treatment methods 
   familiarise you with legislations, economic aspects and preventive measures relating to environmental pollution 
   provide you with training to be able to apply the theoretical knowledge to a real-life pollution problem 
   
 
 Petrochemical Engineering
  
  This module will look at: 
   
   the concepts of origin and formation of petroleum, and types and quality of refinery feedstock and products 
   various sections of petroleum processing in refineries 
   refinery economics and planning 
   advanced topics in petrochemical engineering such as catalyst development, desulphurisation, pollution control and hydrogen production 
   
 
 Multi-phase Processing
  
  This module helps you to understand important concepts and principles in multi-phase processes and their application to chemical engineering. The concepts are limited to those involving only incompressible Newtonian fluids with flow through circular pipes and simple mixing in tanks. 
 
 Process Control Strategies 
  
  The design of a satisfactory process control system is an integral part of process design. You’ll look at the design of the control system, the design of the control loop and the design of the controller itself. You’ll also study the role of models and modelling in process control. 
 
 Laboratory Management
  
  This module will give you an understanding of: 
   
   the need to follow national and legal requirements relating to safety, health and environmental aspects of organisations and employees 
   best laboratory practice in specific sectors of the industry 
   the management of resources, customer service levels and departmental skills 
   
 
 Analytical Techniques & Automation
  
  In this module you’ll look at: 
   
   the purpose and role of analytical functions in the business environment 
   the need to build customer relationships in analytical work 
   process analysis (automation) in the organisation 
   quality and regulatory issues 
   analytical principles and tools 
   
 
 Management of Technological Innovation
  
  This module explores: 
   
   the need to harness technology for business and customer needs 
   change management 
   how to remove the barriers which limit technology delivery 
   how to optimise the technical performance of individuals and teams 
   the need for continuous improvement 
   the globalisation of technology and its applications, 
   the need for networking and for good communication 
   
 
 Understanding Financial Information
 
   This module aims to provide you with an appreciation of how companies manage and report financial information. You will learn about:
   
   
   the nature and form of a company’s financial statements 
   the interpretation of financial reports 
   budgets and budgeting 
   the behaviour of costs and the implications for short-term decisions 
   calculating the cost of products and services and an understanding of the cost allocation problem 
   project evaluation techniques 
   
 
 Managing People
 
   This module aims to provide you with an understanding of how the key aspects of human resource management functions are carried out in organisations. On completion of this module you will be able to:
   
   
   understand modern organisation structures and the behaviour of people within them 
   be able to apply human resource management policies 
   understand how to develop personal skills in organising and leading people at work 
   
 
 Project Management
  
  This module aims to provide you with skills relating to the use of engineering practices in project management. There is a focus on the effective and efficient use of resources. 
 
 Business & Technology Strategy
  
  This module aims to provide you with an understanding of how companies develop their business strategy and the role that technology development plays in that process. You will learn about: 
   
   organisation, missions/vision/objectives, strategy, environments 
   analysing the environments 
   the organisation, value chain, organisational structure and culture 
   assessment of strategic options 
   planning 
   implementation, success or failure 
   models & theory school overview 
   
 
 IT Systems & Strategy
  
  This module gives you a broad understanding of the range of computerised information systems in organisations and their strategic use. The module will teach the following: 
   
   databases 
   knowledge-based expert systems 
   IS design 
   corporate portals 
   strategies & IS/ICT 
   
 
 Modern Process Measurements
  
  You’ll gain an understanding of the operating principles and capabilities of a number of advanced instrumentation techniques. This will allow you to make quantitative assessments about the suitability of these tools for particular industrial or research applications. 
 
 Nanotechnology
  
  This module aims to provide you with knowledge about the physical and chemical properties of nanomaterials, their applications, and methods for their production. Some topics include: 
   
   overview of nanotechnology and nanomaterials 
   general properties of materials 
   properties, characterisation, applications, and methods of production of nanospheres, nanorods, nanosheets and nanoporous materials 
   interactions between nanoparticles 
   structure formation and self-assembly of nanoparticles 
   
 
 Membrane Technology
  
  This module aims to provide you with a deeper understanding of membrane technology including: 
   
   advanced systems and processes for manufacture 
   research and innovation in novel applications and materials 
   markets and applications, particularly emerging applications 
   theoretical models describing membrane performance 
   
 
 Molecular Simulation in Chemical Engineering
  
  This module looks at: 
   
   how chemical engineering processes operate at a molecular scale and how the molecular scale eventually determines what happens at the process scale 
   the usefulness of molecular simulation in chemical engineering 
   the theoretical framework that underlies molecular simulations, thermodynamics and basic statistical mechanics 
   molecular simulation conventions 
   transferable skills useful for obtaining measurements from simulations, analysing data and communication of technical data and ideas 
   
 
 Nuclear Engineering
  
  This module gives you an introduction to the nuclear industry. The module covers: 
   
   radiation - fission & fusion 
   reactor technology 
   shielding 
   health physics 
   nuclear fuel cycle 
   nuclear waste 
   nuclear proliferation 
   safety 
   sustainability 
   
 
 Fuel Cells
  
  This module provides you with an introduction to the fuel cell industry. The module covers: 
   
   technical aspects like construction 
   choice of materials 
   different electrolytes 
   potential outputs 
   alternative fuel cycle 
   waste 
   sustainability 
   
 
 Model-based Process Control 
  
  This module covers part of the requirements necessary for the IChemE’s new Process Automation Specialist syllabus. The module is directed at advanced control techniques and is particularly concerned with process modelling and then the use of such models in model-based control schemes. 
 
 Individual Project
  
  This is the final assessment of MSc and MEng programmes and is only taken by students in their final year of these degrees. 
  The module extends across the various advanced chemical engineering and business/management subjects taught during the course. You’ll explore an advanced technical issue and a business case within your industrial workplace. 
 
 Communicating Science & Technology
  
  This module aims to provide you with the skills to provide reliable, accurate and intelligent communication between scientists/engineers and the non-technical professions and the public. 
  It also provides you with the skills to critically assess media and other communications around major engineering issues, to identify and critically evaluate accuracy, and potential bias common in different formats from different sources aimed at different audiences. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is delivered through the web on our virtual learning environment called Myplace. Lecturers provide support through online tutorials, forums, email, telephone, and, if demand is sufficient, face-to-face on campus tutorials.   
 