Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Foundations of Research & Business Analysis
 
   This class will explore the generic problem solving process which underpins the provision of decision support. In particular, it'll consider the role of modelling in that process. The activities of problem structuring, data collection and analysis, identification and evaluation of options, communication and implementation of learning, findings and recommendations will each be discussed along with the issues pertaining to each of them. 
 
 Quantitative Business Analysis
  
  Quantitative Business Analysis runs over one semester but in two parts. The first part provides an introduction to the basic theory and application of statistical modelling. Topics covered included data analysis, probability theory, distributions and moments, estimation and hypothesis testing. 
  The second part focuses mainly on two areas - regression modelling and multivariate analysis. While key background theory will be presented, the emphasis is on the generation and interpretation of output from commercially available software. 
 
 Managing Business Operations
 
   This class teaches essential principles, tools and techniques of Operations Management – both in general and as applied to specific manufacturing or service businesses. A section of the class focuses on service operations, where specific subjects and operational issues surrounding services will be discussed. 
 
 Spreadsheet Modelling & Demand Forecasting
  
  This module will demonstrate how spreadsheets can be used to support the analytical techniques whose theory is taught on other modules. For example, forecasting, simulation, optimisation, data analysis, as well as being used to support technical report writing. 
  Most prominence is given to demand forecasting and you'll be introduced to different types of forecasting technique for short term smoothing through to decompositional analysis. These methods will be implemented using spreadsheet models. 
 
 Operational Research Methods
  
  This module introduces the fundamental deterministic and stochastic methods of OR. Probabilistic modelling is fundamental to appreciating uncertainty and risk. This element of the class provides much of the foundations that underpin the tools and techniques that are taught on other classes of the MSc such as statistics, forecasting, risk and simulation. 
  The module also introduces students into the basic deterministic models and methods of OR. 
 
 Becoming an Effective OR Modeller
 
   The broad aims of the class are to develop skills in the effective practice of using OR models and an appreciation of the issues which may arise. 
 
 Elective classes 
 Business Simulation Methods
  
  The module will focus on the main two forms of business simulation; discrete-event simulation (DES) and system dynamics (a continuous simulation technique). For DES, the class will start with an introduction, aiming to familiarise students with the concept and its use. 
  It continues with discussing a rational approach to simulation using a number of examples from manufacturing and service operations. For system dynamics the class will provide a background to system dynamics including its links to other modelling techniques being taught on the course, in particular, its links to problem structuring methods. 
 
 Risk Analysis & Management
  
  This module will explore the entire process of structuring a risk problem, modelling it, supporting and communicating recommendations, both theoretically and in practice. 
  Risk management is linked with decision analysis in so far as we explore decision making under uncertainty and it has links with quantitative business analysis as we explore the use of statistics in understanding risk. However, the topic has some unique attributes such as risk communication and the role that experts play in risk assessment. 
 
 Decision Analysis
  
  The first half of the course covers the basic ideas of decision making under uncertainty. Graphical modelling using Bayesian Nets (Influence diagrams and Belief nets) are used to structure models. 
  In the second half of the course, trade-offs between different desirable attributes are covered through multi-attribute value theory and multi-attribute utility theory. 
 
 Analytics for Big Data 
  
  Every two days, we generate as much data as the data generated in all human history up to 2003. From online data on every click of the mouse on the internet through the huge upsurge in manufacturing companies’ use of sensors to sports organisations collecting in game data. With these increased quantities of data comes an increased need for tools to make sense of the main messages coming from these data. 
  The class will build on the fundamental multivariate statistics by developing both visualisation and advanced analysis techniques relevant in the area of big data. The focus will be on application and interpretation of techniques and there will be an investigation of what makes good data. The class will develop both new theoretical knowledge in the form of analytics techniques as well as new software skills in relevant analytics software. 
 
 Project/Dissertation
  
  The MSc project is the most substantial and independent piece of work you'll carry out during their course. Prior to starting the project, you'll attend a workshop on methodology; the purpose of this workshop is not to equip you with methods for your research but rather to develop a sense of orientation and set the tone for the independent work. 
  You'll then contact your client and your supervisors and manage the whole relationship with them. The projects vary but they typically involve understanding the real-life problem through problem structuring, identifying the data requirements, review of the relevant domain literature, making methodological choices based on arguments from the methodology literature, data collection, appropriate data analysis and modelling, developing and presentation of findings and recommendations. 
 
  Advanced Operational Research Modelling Using Specialist Software Tools
  
  This module builds upon the methods introduced in core modules in deterministic and stochastic OR. In particular, OR methods, quantitative business analysis, decision analysis. 
  In the core modules, the theory and application of methods to relatively small problems are considered. This module extends the approach to consider larger scale modelling and more advanced techniques using appropriate specialist software as well as programming techniques. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is delivered in various ways. While most classes have regular lectures, tutorials and hands-on software sessions, experiential learning is a crucial part of the course. This is delivered through projects and case studies with various external organisations, the apprenticeship scheme and MSc projects. 
 There are also guest lectures and recruitment events throughout the year, as well as a number of career support sessions that provide you with invaluable career information and generic job hunting skills such as CV writing and how to handle interviews. 
 Guest lectures 
 Every year we have guest speakers attend the course, sharing their invaluable experiences with the students.   As part of the Becoming an Effective Business Analyst/Operational Research Modeller module, we hosted several presentations from external bodies e.g. Simul8. 
 Last year, we were honoured with the visit of Alex Scharaschkin, the Director of the National Audit Office and Christopher Bray, Head of Environmental Risk Policy Management at the Barclays group. 
 Distance learning option 
 All classes are taught using material presented via  the Internet. Classes are supported by faculty members who also teach  on the full-time course and who guide and support discussion via  discussion forums. This is a flexible degree and duration can vary. 
 Minimum durations are PgCert: 13 months; PgDip: 20 months; MSc:26 months. 
 