Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Semesters 1 & 2 
 Management & Leadership 1
  
  This class asks you to self-reflect and evaluate your current knowledge and skills against the relevant performance indicators of your post. Key attributes of leaders are studied and you start to form a learning plan for the remainder of the course. 
  
 Semester 2 
 Management & Leadership 2
  
  In this class you'll study aspects of teamwork, assertiveness and complete further self-evaluation of success of initiatives implemented in your first elective class. 
 
 Management & Leadership 3
  
  This class looks at current educational policy in Scotland, the UK and globally. You choose a relevant area from these and apply what you learn to an initiative in school and thereafter critically analyse its link to policy. 
 
 Elective classes 
 Semester 1 
 Management & Leadership
  
  In this class you'll learn about various leadership styles and how these have altered through the ages. We look at how various styles are applied in different contexts and how this affects staff motivation. 
  
 Semester 2 
 Leading & Managing People
  
  You'll learn how to get the best from your team﻿. 
 
 Managing Change
  
  Change is a complex entity and in this module we look at what causes change and how we can ensure that our staff are prepared to deal with it. 
 
 Managing Learning & Teaching
  
  This class looks at key learning theories and pedagogical practices which a leader and manager in education must be aware of. 
 
 Managing Effective Learning for All
  
  Inclusion and Equality has increasingly to be considered in educational establishments. This class looks at how a leader and manager can ensure that the learning of all participants is provided for. 
 
 Introduction to Quality and Performance Management
  
  This class looks at how the emphasis of public service has shifted from focusing on inputs to the benefits to consumer and community. There is a focus on strategic and business planning models. 
 
 Education & The Law 
  
  This class looks at the key legal documents and knowledge that an educational leader and manager in Scotland must understand. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The course is delivered through lectures and teaching seminars. This programme provides structured support through study, work-based projects and development tasks. 
 Most modules are offered both within and outside normal working hours to suit individual circumstances. 
 