Course content 
 Semesters 1 & 2 
 Professional Management Practice 
  
  This class develops your awareness and capabilities as a manager using a Personal Development Plan (PDP) process to help you critically evaluate the skills and attributes needed to be effective. Over the course of the year, workshops and exercises will help you identify and move towards fulfilling your potential. 
 
 Semester 1 
 Analytical Support for Decision Making
  
  This class develops skills in the effective practice of business analysis through the application of tools and techniques and to develop an appreciation of the issues which may require careful management if the decisions made are to be based upon valid data and models. 
 
 Managing People in Organisations 
 
   With organisations increasingly becoming global and interconnected, understanding the challenges for managing those employed by firms is vitally important. This class provides insight into how organisations function and the impact on individual behaviour. It will also help you understand the key theories leading to a more effective manager and leader. 
 
 Leadership for Change & Innovation 
  
  The central premise of this class is that whilst prudent management is essential, it is not sufficient to assure sustainable business success. Leadership in any sector involves using creativity and vision to navigate a unique path through wicked problems and turbulent times. 
  This class draws together the latest theories and practices to develop skills and understanding for effective leadership in the context of change. It also informs the practices of leadership in innovative project teams. 
 
 Managerial Accounting
  
  This class develops your ability to understand the nature and limitations of the information provided in the external, and internal, financial reports. It introduces some of the accounting techniques underlying business activity, and builds your awareness of the financial implications of strategic and operational decisions. 
 
 Semester 2 
 Marketing Management
  
  This class examines contemporary international practice, exploring the major concepts and techniques involved in the marketing planning process. It will help you analyse what companies are offering, how customers behave, and ultimately identify what they need to do next to deliver on their objectives. 
 
 Business Operations
  
  This class considers the key aspects of design, planning and control of operating systems in a global context. By examining the practice of leading organisations it will help you understand how organisations configure their operations and the challenges involved in managing them. 
 
 Finance & Financial Management 
  
  This class will introduce you to the principles of financial markets and institutions, corporate financial theory and financial decision making. It examines the core concepts and valuation models involved in pricing securities, the choices firms make over how to fund themselves and the techniques used to evaluate internal investment proposals. 
 
 Semester 3 
 Project Methodology
  
  This class introduces you to a range of different methodological approaches to conducting research and key issues researchers are commonly faced with (eg relevance of practitioner engagement, ethics). You will be provided a broad overview of research choices and issues from the perspective of Strathclyde staff representing each department in the Business Faculty who will present vignettes from their own research projects. 
 
 Business Strategy
  
  This class provides opportunities to explore, understand and apply the language of strategy and strategic management. By examining real-life organisations, you will develop your understanding of the forces within their contextual and transactional environments that influence their strategy, and by applying different strategic frameworks, develop the ability to critically analyse the strategic direction being adopted. 
 
 Managing Technology & Innovation 
  
  Innovation has become a core management capability for those organisations that want to succeed in today’s tough business climate. 
  The class focuses on the management of technological innovation in contemporary business firms with a strong emphasis on the key role of people and organisations in creating, developing and transferring new knowledge, products, processes and services. By drawing from the state of the art innovation literature as well as a wealth of original, in-depth, real world case study materials, the course analyses the opportunities and challenges related to creating, sustaining and managing innovation in the 21st century. 
 
 Consultancy in Practice
  
  As the final class in the degree program the Consulting in Practice class is aimed at developing effective and reflective practitioners/managers. This class provides students with the opportunity to deploy many aspects of their learning by engaging with a live issue provided by a client company. It commences with a review of key theories and tools that students have studied as part of their degree with consideration given on how to use these in this exercise. This is followed by analysis of material provided by the client which describes the issue to be addressed and the outcome expected by the client. 
  This then leads into a group activity which applies particular techniques for addressing aspects of the client’s issue. More detailed client input is provided at certain points in the process often through direct interface with the client. This allows students to gain a more in-depth understanding of the issue and to try out various solutions. Further analysis is carried out by the groups and the class concludes with students presenting their thinking to their client. The client presentations are then followed by a reflective session where the tutor, client and students are encouraged to explore the process of the class and develop the learning gained. 
 
 Elective classes
  
  To help you develop new skills and/or extend your knowledge in areas that you see as relevant to your personal learning objectives, students are asked to undertake two elective classes. These classes are chosen from a wide portfolio of elective subjects, which are revised annually to reflect the latest business thinking. 
  In the past students have chosen from these classes: 
   
   Brand Management & Strategy 
   Foundations of Risk 
   New Venture Creation 
   Programme & Project Management 
   Games of Strategy 
   Leadership 
   Strategic Financial Management 
   Management of International Relationships 
   Change Agency 
   Developing Skills for Effective Management Consulting 
   Social Media: Strategy and Management 
   Managing in Europe (Taught at Toulouse Business School, France) 
   
  A full list of the electives available in the 2015/2016 academic year will be communicated during Semester 2. 
 
 The MBM Project
  
  The MBM project provides the opportunity to apply what you have learned to a practical situation. Working under the supervision of a member of faculty, you'll spend time working individually, or in a group, on a topic of central interest to you in the area of Business and Management. You'll learn the skills needed to develop a proposal and conduct an effective enquiry into your topic area, producing a report that is both informed and practical. 
  MBM projects are diverse, with a vast array of industries and disciplines being undertaken. Many projects are undertaken with organisations and the business school may be able to assist in identifying appropriate clients. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 Classes differ significantly from traditional formal lectures. Academic staff maximise opportunities for class discussion and debate about how organisations are tackling real-life business issues and whether their approaches are appropriate in other contexts. 
 You’ll often be given individual or group-based research tasks to be fed back in class. This emphasis upon practical skills gives you a greater understanding of what’s happening in a wide range of organisational contexts. It also helps you to be able to formulate relevant, practical, responses to the complex issues. 
 Our teaching is focused on helping you to develop the high level of personal and interpersonal skills that employers are looking for. You’ll find that, from your very first day, we’ll be there helping you to find effective ways to manage yourself, while getting the best from those you're working with. 
 Through workshops, and in classes, we’ll help you to perfect your ability to communicate the insights you get from the analytical techniques we teach and the research you undertake. 
 Living case study 
 The Living case study is an innovative way of bringing participants to an understanding of what it means to deal with organisational issues at a managerial level. The exercise casts participants in the role of a graduate trainee who has been asked by the management director to analyse the behaviours in the company and present to the board a way forward. 
 Management consultancy firm Accenture regularly attend the final presentations. These presentations showcase the professionalism of the cohort and the analytic skills they have acquired through this and the other classes that make up the syllabus. Accenture’s experienced consultants recognise the type of issues and behaviours recreated in the simulation and provide hints and tips on dealing with problem situations and communicating ideas to executives. 
 Guest lectures 
 All classes on the MBM programme have a number of guest speakers from industry. You're also regularly invited to Business School industry lectures and networking events. 
 