Course content 
 Compulsory classes 
 Globalised Childhood: Theoretical & Policy Contexts
  
  The aim of this class is for you to be able to develop an understanding of the approaches underpinning child and youth care.   You'll be able to critically review the historical and current discourses which influence the nature of child and youth care services in their own country and elsewhere. 
  In charting the development of child and youth care, you should be able to draw links between the nature of provision and prevailing socio-political and cultural factors including, where relevant, legislation and social policy. The global adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) will be examined and its influence on child care practice globally critically analysed. 
 
 Child Development in the Lifespace
  
  The aim of this class is for you to critically analyse how your understanding of child development helps you to understand children and inform their practice. You'll explore and critique key research and theories of child development and childhood to support a developmental orientation that informs your understanding and assessment of children and youth. 
  The impact of disability, adversity, disadvantage, discrimination, abuse, separation, grief and loss will all be considered as well as the skills involved in observing, assessing and understanding children and youth in their lifespaces. 
 
 Management & Leadership
  
  The aim of this class is provide you with a critical understanding of the key concepts of management and leadership and their importance in creating and maintaining effective therapeutic child and youth care environments. 
  The importance of organisational culture will be explored alongside an analysis of the key managerial and leadership qualities, emotional intelligence and empathy, which are necessary to promote the growth and development of individuals and teams. 
 
 Critical Reflection & Relational Practice
  
  The aim of this class is to encourage you to critically evaluate your interactions with children and youth with a view to developing and enhancing skills in the area of relational practice. 
  You'll engage with Video Interaction Guidance (VIG) and Video Enhanced Reflective Practice (VERP) as a means to develop your ability to critically reflect upon your communication skills and use of self in addition to improving your self-awareness and practice in a manner where you model and demonstrate reflexivity. 
 
 Interventions
  
  The aim of this class is to encourage you to evaluate interventions with children and youth across a range of child and youth practice areas with a view to you developing effective practice and programmes of intervention. 
  There will be an examination of the components of effective therapeutic milieu and programmes, and you'll be encouraged to consider a specific intervention or change that you implement in the workplace. 
 
  Use of Self, Communication Skills & Critical Reflection
  
  The aim of this class is to encourage you to critically evaluate your interactions with children and youth with a view to developing and enhancing skills in the area of relational practice. 
  You'll engage with Video Enhanced Reflective Practice (VERP) as a means to develop your ability to critically reflect upon your communication skills and use of self in addition to improving your self-awareness and practice in a manner where you model and demonstrate reflexivity. 
 
 Research Methods
  
  The aim of this class is to encourage you to be research minded, and provide you with an understanding of the nature, characteristics and ethical considerations involved in research in child and youth care. 
  In doing this, you'll develop a critical understanding of the philosophical and methodological aspects of carrying out research with children and youth. 
 
 Masters Research Project
  
  This is a substantial independent study class which forms the final, compulsory, element in the MSc in Child and Youth Care Studies by Distance Learning programme. 
  It involves carrying out an investigative and developmental programme of work which is of professional relevance to you. This will be assessed on the basis of a dissertation of approximately 15,000 words. The work enables and obliges you to draw on the skills and insights acquired in the taught element of the Masters programme. 
  
 Learning & teaching 
 The programme is delivered entirely online with no attendance required. 
 Modules involve a range of individual and group tasks in addition to live online sessions where the student group will participate in online seminars. 
 You’ll require: 
  
  access to a reliable computer with sufficient processing capability 
  an excellent broadband connection 
  the ability to run applications such as Adobe Connect, Adobe Reader, Flash Player, Java and Windows Media Player