Course content 
 Postgraduate Certificate classes
 These classes are compulsory. 
 Understanding Inclusive Education
  
  This class is designed for those who teach, or who might in the future teach children or young people with additional support needs. It focuses on: 
   
   return to study as an adult learner 
   historical development of provision for additional support needs and inclusion and on the ideas underlying patterns of provision 
   concepts of inclusion, additional support for learning and of educational support 
   effective provision for additional support needs and inclusion within the new legislative framework. 
   
 
 Providing Effective Educational Support
  
  This class provides a framework that allows analysis and evaluation of the experience of the learner, of professional practice, provision and policy. Areas to be addressed may include: 
   
   theories of learning, teaching and the curriculum 
   consideration of the implications of the above for classroom experiences 
   strategies for observation and assessment of aspects of the learning environment 
   looking at the potential barriers in relation to learning and how to overcome them in order to support the needs of learners 
   
 
 Working Together in Educational Settings
  
  The advent of Getting Right for Every Child and the Children and Young People Act (2014) creates a context in which those working in educational settings are required to work with a wide range of agencies, parents and carers, and children and young people themselves.    
  This class will explore the opportunities, tensions, dilemmas and practical problems in implementing current policy and legislation. It aims to support collaborative practice by: 
   
   examining the concepts and issues involved in collaborative teamwork 
   identifying aspects of successful practice 
   recognising barriers to successful working, their source, and range 
   developing strategies to avoid or overcome barriers and build successful practice, thereby promoting and sustaining a positive learning environment. 
   
 
 Postgraduate Diploma classes
 These classes are optional. You also have the option of taking classes from other courses within the modular MEd, such as Understanding the Impact of Autism or Early Years Pedagogue. 
 Inclusive Pedagogy
  
  This class focuses on developing inclusive practice through supporting individuals within the context of a rich learning environment that is accessible to all children. 
  It's designed for all teachers who have a responsibility for meeting the learning needs of all  children and young people.   
  It focuses on of ways of identifying and responding to the learning needs of the individual within the context of classroom practice and support structures. 
  It considers issues related to pedagogy and problems that might arise from labelling and pathologising.   
 
 Supporting Numeracy
  
  This class aims to develop teachers’ understanding of children’s mathematical development so that they are equipped to identify and support children struggling in this area. 
  Teachers will learn to apply their knowledge of children’s mathematical development and processes of educational support.   This is within the context of an inclusive pedagogy which focuses on ways of teaching that are common to all learners. 
  The course content is theoretically underpinned by two internationally recognised research-based frameworks: Cognitively Guided Instruction developed at the University of Wisconsin: Madison and Maths Recovery.   
 
 Supporting Literacy
  
  It is a requirement of Curriculum for Excellence that teachers of all sectors and subjects address literacy in the course of their teaching. 
  This class is designed to support teachers’ developing understanding of their role in developing children’s literacy and in supporting other teaching staff in doing so. 
  You'll consider issues arising from the diverse requirements of the various school contexts. 
  You'll develop an understanding of ways of teaching, talking and listening, reading and writing within the context of inclusive pedagogies (