Modules  The modules we offer on the programme are designed to give you a flying start towards becoming an ICAEW Chartered Accountant and in many modules, if you adequately pass the module you will gain credit for ICAEW Certificate level and Professional level modules. 
  
   The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer. 
   
   
  
  
   
   Typical Year One Modules
    
    
   
   
    Compulsory  
    
    Principles of Taxation 
    
    
     This module will enable you to understand the general objectives of taxation and to calculate income tax, national insurance contributions, capital gains tax, corporation tax and VAT in straightforward scenarios. You will have 11 two-hour lectures and three one-hour seminars.  
    
   
       
    
    
    Organisational Behaviour 
    
    
     This module will introduce you to the basic ideas of organisational behaviour. The content will encourage you to develop an understanding of managing and developing people within business organisations. The module will draw its primary material from the major theorists and theories of both organisational psychology and organisational behaviour. The module will also develop links with other aspects of the business school curriculum such as general management and international business. You will have 11 two-hour lectures and a one hour tutorial across the semester.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Assurance 
    
    
     This module is aimed at ensuring that you understand the assurance process and fundamental principles of ethics and are able to contribute to the assessment of internal controls and gathering of evidence on an assurance engagement. You will have 11 two-hour lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Computers in Business 
    
   
     This module will introduce the use of computers and IT in business today, with an emphasis on spreadsheet modelling. By the end of the module, you will have developed a knowledge of the development, management, and exploitation of information systems and their impact on organizations, as well as of the comprehensive use of relevant systems for application in business and management. The module is delivered through a combination of two weekly one-hour lectures, with four weeks of one-hour computing sessions, and a one-off workshop and tutorial.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Financial Accounting 
    
   
     This module will introduce you to key accounting concepts, including the impact of accounting policy selection on profit, accounting standards, and the recording and collecting of accounting information. You will develop accounting reports, such as balance sheets and cash-flow statements, alongside knowledge of some contemporary accounting issues. This module is delivered through a one-hour lecture and a one-hour seminar each week.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Business Law A 
    
   
     This module will introduce you to aspects of business law within a UK legal framework. You will develop an understanding of major issues, such as the impact of EU legislation, Law of Contract, Tort Law, Employment Law, and law in a global context. The teaching is delivered through a series of two-hour lectures each week, with four weeks of one-hour seminars.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Macroeconomics for Business 
    
   
     This module allows you to explore the nature and scope of the macroeconomic policy agenda, and develops the analytical frameworks necessary for the evaluation of policy instruments. The module enables you to understand the economic arguments that under-lie different views and to evaluate relevant arguments.  You’ll have nine two-hour lectures, one one-hour lecture, and three one-hour tutorials.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Microeconomics for Business A 
    
   
     This module will introduce you to microeconomic aspects of the market and the firm. Topics will include market demand, supply and equilibrium, firm production and costs, market structure, and oligopoly and monopoly. The teaching consists of a two-hour lecture each week, with three weeks of single one-hour seminars.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Business Law B 
    
    
     
     Building on the knowledge gained in Business Law A, this module goes on to consider legal topics such as agency, legal personality, management and the administration of a company, and insolvency. This module consists of a two-hour lecture each week, with four weeks of single one-hour seminars.  
      
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Business Finance 
    
   
     In this module you will develop an understanding of some of the central aspects of finance, including the relationship between the risk of an investment and expected returns, the concept of the time-value of money, and the fundamentals of portfolio theory. By the end of the module, you will be able to apply NPV to project appraisal in realistic scenarios, and estimate the cost of capital for bonds and equity. This module is delivered through a weekly two-hour lecture, with three weeks of single one-hour tutorials.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Management Accounting and Decisions I 
    
   
     This module will introduce you to topics such as cost concepts and the allocation of manufacturing overheads, absorption and variable costing, cost-volume-profit analysis, and budgeting. By the end of the module, you will have an understanding of management accounting techniques and their role in management decision-making. This module is delivered through five two-hour lectures, four two-hour workshops, one one-hour tutorial, and one two-hour guest lecture.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Quantitative Methods 1b 
    
   
     In this module you’ll study key mathematical and statistical techniques and their application to problems and data including: economic application of calculus; confidence intervals; introduction to hypothesis testing; partial differentiation, optimisation of two variables, probability, random variables and sampling distributions. Over the course of this module you’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and eight workshops.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Typical Year Two Modules   
   
   
   Compulsory 
     
   
     Audit and Assurance 
    
    
     The aim of this module is to ensure that you build upon the year one Assurance module, developing a wider knowledge of International Standards on Auditing and a deeper understanding of critical aspects of acceptance, planning, managing, concluding and reporting on assurance engagements, including statutory audit engagements.  
    
   
       
    
    
    Financial Accounting and Reporting I 
    
    
     This aim of this module is to ensure that you build upon the year 1 Financial Accounting module and understand a wider range of International Financial Reporting Standards. This will include studying the reporting framework, concepts and ethics, preparation of single entity and simple consolidated financial statements.  
    
   
       
    
    
    Financial Management 
    
    
     This module will develop a critical understanding of the theory and practice of corporate financial management and will introduce you to the corporate investment and financing decision as well as the interaction between the investment and financing decision.  
    
   
       
    
    
    Management Strategy 
    
    
     This module will introduce and analyse the key concepts, theories and frameworks integral to the strategic management of organisations and to apply them to real-world situations. It will provide you with a theoretical and applied overview of strategic management in today's operational environment.   
    
   
       
    
    
    Tax Compliance 
    
    
     This module will develop your understanding of income tax, national insurance contributions, capital gains tax, corporation tax, inheritance tax and value added tax rules and enable you to prepare tax computations for individuals and companies in straightforward scenarios. The module builds on Principles of Taxation knowledge and also considers ethics and the law.  
    
   
       
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Typical Year Three Modules   
   
   
    Compulsory  
   
     Business Ethics 
    
    
     This module explores the relationships between business and society through the theories and practices of business ethics and social responsibility. You will begin by looking at the concept of business ethics, discussing citizenship theory and the challenges of globalization, before going on to discuss the impact of businesses on individual stakeholder groups and analysing business ethics and social responsibility in relation to each group. This module consists of a one-hour lecture each week, with four one-hour seminars.   
    
   
       
    
   
     Business Planning: Taxation 
    
   
     This is hidden 
    
   
       
    
   
     Computational Finance 
    
    
     This module will provide you with the skills and ideas necessary to implement basic computational approaches to financial problems. The module stresses the fundamentals of finance; provides you with a knowledge and understanding of the key finance subjects such as money market, return metric, portfolio models and asset pricing models. It equips you with the essential techniques applied in financial calculations.   
    
   
       
    
   
     Corporate Finance 
    
   
     This module aims at developing your knowledge of financial decision-making and strategic financial decisions, including mergers and takeovers, providing the conceptual framework and analytic tools necessary to understand corporate financial management. This module consists of weekly one-hour lectures, with two weeks of two-hour seminars.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Management Accounting and Decisions II 
    
   
     The aim of this module is to build on the learning from Management Accounting and Decisions I in order to further develop your skills in the computational aspects of management accounting and explore the relevance, significance and applicability of such techniques. It will introduce topics including activity based costing, process costing, transfer pricing and the changing role of the management accountant.
     
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
  
   
    
    Typical Year Four Modules  
   
   
    Compulsory  
    
    Contemporary Issues in Accounting 
    
   
     This is hidden 
    
   
       
    
      
    Optional  
    
    Corporate Restructuring and Governance 
    
    
     The aim of this module is to introduce you to the analysis of different forms of corporate restructuring, with a focus on the internal and external factors influencing restructuring as well as the effects of restructuring on a variety of firm level outcomes. It examines the antecedents and consequences of corporate restructuring and factors triggering corporate restructuring are considered in a number of alternative organisational settings. In particular, the role of corporate governance in inducing and shaping corporate restructuring receives special attention (in particular, executive compensation and the market for corporate control). The process of restructuring is discussed against a background of resource-based, agency and behavioural theories of the firm. The impact of corporate restructuring on the size, complexity, incentive systems and ownership structure of large firms is examined. Finally, the evidence relating to the effects of corporate restructuring on performance, employment, R&D and corporate governance is examined.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Financial Markets 
    
    
     This module examines markets for equity and debt and markets for derivative instruments. It will introduce you to the processes of portfolio building, management and performance measurement and examines the workings of the major financial markets, looking at the way in which the prices of financial instruments are calculated. The module covers the key theoretical models of modern finance, capital asset pricing model, arbitrage pricing model, financial risk management with derivative instruments.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Management Accounting and Decisions III 
    
    
     The aim of this module is to build on the theme of management accounting change introduced in Management Accounting and Decisions II and highlight the importance of management accounting information as an aid to strategic decision-making. It offers a critical review of management accounting techniques and new forms of performance management. This module consists of a weekly one-hour lecture and two weeks of one-hour seminars.    
    
   
       
    
   
     Professional Services Dissertation 
    
   
     This is hidden 
    
   
       
    
   
     Risk Management Decisions 
    
    
     This module will help you understand the different aspects of corporate risk, including the negative impact of risk on the stakeholders of a modern organisation, the risk-creation process in an organisation, and the nature of value-creating risk management decisions. This module is delivered through a 90-minute lecture each week, with two weeks of single one-hour seminars.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Exploring Perspectives in Entrepreneurship 
    
    
     The module aims to develop an understanding of entrepreneurs and the firms they create and manage. It is designed to examine the nature and role of smaller enterprises, set the context for entrepreneurship and consider characteristics, attributes and resources of entrepreneurs. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and three one-hour seminars to cover material for this module.   
    
   
       
    
   
     Technology Entrepreneurship in Practice 
    
   
       
    This module will introduce you to the importance of, and the processes involved in, the commercialisation of science and technology. The content of the course is highly relevant in the current climate where Government is placing much evidence on the wealth creation process. You will have 11 90 minute lectures plus two one-hour tutorials to cover material in this module. 
    
   
       
    
   
     Human Resource Management 
    
    
    This module introduces the basic concepts of Human Resource Management (HRM), puts these concepts in broader perspective and subjects them to critical analysis. Areas covered will include HRM models, Recruitment and selection, Appraisal and pay, Training, Job design, Work-life balance and HRM and performance.  
    You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour tutorials