Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff. They’re also shaped by new developments in industry and as a consequence, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules on offer.   
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
  
    Engineering Mathematics 1 
   
   
   
     This module introduces the algebra of complex numbers to provide a key mathematical tool for analysis of linear mathematical and engineering problems. The complexity of solving general systems of equations is introduced and their study using matrix techniques. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and workshops. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Engineering Mathematics 2 
   
   
   
     You’ll be introduced to techniques for solving selected first-order and second-order differential equations relevant to the analysis of generic engineering problems. The module also provides mathematical tools in terms of advanced differential calculus and vectors for modelling of generic engineering situations given in terms of multi-dimensional models. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and workshops. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Circuits and Fields 
   
   
   
     This module provides the understanding of the physical world including an introduction to electric and magnetic fields and circuit theory and passive components. For study of this module you’ll spend around three hours in lectures each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Electronic Engineering 
   
   
   
     This module provides an introduction to Electronic Engineering, including topics such as: Boolean algebra and minimisation techniques, linear amplifiers and other circuits utilising the operational amplifier, the physical principles of diodes, bipolar and field-effect transistors and their application to circuits. You’ll have three 1-hour lectures per week plus eight 1-hour progress tests per year to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Communications Engineering 
   
   
   
     You’ll be given an introduction to communication systems and an overview of fundamental signal and system concepts. The module looks at methods to describe signals mathematically and in terms of their time and frequency domain representation. You’ll examine aspects of noise on signals and system performance, filters, amplitude and frequency modulation and basic concepts in digital signal processing. MATLAB will be used in problem solving. You’ll have three 1-hour lectures per week plus four 1-hour progress tests per semester to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Computer Engineering 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to computer engineering, you’ll cover topics such as: an overview of computer architectures, software design methodologies, the software life-cycle, C-programming, software development strategies and verification and validation procedures. You’ll have two 1-hour lectures per week as well as nine 3-hour laboratories and four 1-hour progress tests per semester to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Electrical Engineering 
   
   
   
     This module provides an introduction to Electrical Engineering and covers topics including: basic electromagnetic principles and the characteristics of electrical coils, the operation of ideal and non-ideal transformers, the equivalent circuit and their applications, reactive and apparent power, basic electro-mechanics .You’ll also have a basic introduction to electrical machines focusing on the operation and analysis of the 3-phase AC cage induction machine. You’ll have two 1-hour lectures and one 1-hour examples class per week plus four 1-hour progress tests per semester to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to real-time systems 
   
   
   
     This project based module uses a Digital Signal Processor to introduce design methodologies appropriate to real-time systems. You’ll work in teams to design hardware and software to implement a real-time system. You’ll have a one hour lecture in the first week plus nine 3-hour laboratory sessions per semester to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Laboratory and Presentation Skills A 
   
   
   
     This module provides the practical experience which complements modules in the first year of all undergraduate courses in the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering. It includes experimental and project work, the development of laboratory and team working skills, and technical report writing. You’ll spend around two hours in lectures and three hours in practicals each week for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
  
    Probabilistic and Numerical Techniques for Engineers 
   
   
   
     This module is divided into two sections, one part develops the foundations of probability theory and allows you to apply large sample statistics within an engineering context. The other part provides you with an introduction to numerical techniques used for obtaining approximate solutions to ordinary differential equations. You’ll normally spend around one hour per week in lectures and two hours in workshops studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Signal Processing and Control Engineering 
   
   
   
     You’ll develop your understanding of systems and system analysis tools as well as basic analogue and digital signal processing methods that would be of use in a wide range of applications in electrical and electronic engineering and beyond. You’ll have three 2-hour lectures and three 1-hour practical each week for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Telecommunications 
   
   
   
     This module provides an introduction to telecommunication systems. Topics covered include: modulation schemes (amplitude, frequency and phase), receiver configurations, noise and interference in analogue systems, delivery systems (copper, fibre, radio wave propagation and transmission-line characteristics) and multiple access techniques. You’ll spend around three hours in lectures and have a three-hour practical per week for study of this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Power Supply Electronics 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to the subject of power electronics you’ll cover subjects such as: methods of analysis for power electronic circuits, comparison of power supplies for electronic equipment, linear and switching regulators, single phase diode rectifiers comparison of power device types; calculation and management of losses in power devices and practical considerations for high speed switching circuits. You’ll have two 1-hour lectures and one 1-hour problems class per week plus two laboratory sessions. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Electronic Engineering Design Project 
   
   
   
     This module takes the form of a laboratory-based project which is performed in groups of three or four students. The overall aim of the project is to design, build, test and document a basic RF communications system with microcomputer control. The tasks are specifically designed to be open- ended. The project exercises and develops skills in analogue electronic design, digital electronic design, real-time software, presentation and group working. You’ll have one 2-hour lecture during week 1 and one 1-hour lecture during week 2 plus one 3-hour laboratory session per week for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Electronic Engineering 
   
   
   
     You’ll cover a range of topics in Electronic Engineering including: schmitt trigger, feedback and relaxation oscillators, synchronous counters with external input; electron mobility, joule heating, and structure of bipolar. You’ll spend around six hours per week in lectures as well as having a three-hour practical laboratory session to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Software Engineering Design 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to the different software design paradigms in use across the range of engineering activity, you’ll examine the concept of object oriented software and its practical implementation in C++, with a full appreciation of the need to design for robustness and the wider needs of code recycling, maintenance and expansion necessary in the modern commercial and technological environment. You’ll spend around two hours in lectures and two hours in practicals per week for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Professional Skills for Electrical & Electronic Engineers 
   
   
   
     Providing you with the key skills required to give professional presentations, you’ll gain an awareness of the different techniques required for varying size audiences, the technologies available and the limitations. Through group working, you’ll develop skills in the preparation of material in a purely visual sense, for example poster, flyer and rolling presentation forms as well as gaining professional skills in the form of CV production and application preparation. You’ll have a one-hour lecture per week for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Mathematical Techniques for Electrical and Electronic Engineers 1 
   
   
   
     The majority of the module is concerned with providing techniques for solving selected classes of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) relevant to the analysis of engineering topics. This module also provides the basic calculus to help analyse engineering problems in two- or three-dimensions and special solutions of partial differential equations relevant to engineering applications. You’ll have a one-hour lecture and two hour workshop to study for this module.   
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Electronic Construction Project 
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to develop awareness of and ability to solve problems in the field of electronic design and construction. You’ll develop a range of practical and experimental skills, focusing on the design and development of a system. You’ll work in small groups and will be required to go through a phase of research and independent learning, as well as keep good traceability of your work during all phases of the project. The applications will be in the field of audio signal processing, an example is the design, building and testing of an audio amplifier and related power supply. You’ll spend around three hours in lectures and three hours in practicals for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Electronic Design 
   
   
   
     Through one 2-hour lecture per week, this module aims to further your understanding of design techniques for transistor-based analogue circuits, using transistor amplifiers as a vehicle for this. Standard high-frequency models are introduced for transistors. This approach enables amplifier operation to be understood and analysed at all signal frequencies, starting with a review of mid-band operation, followed by low and high frequency operation. Finally the origins and effect of noise in electronic circuits is introduced. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Solid State Devices 
   
   
   
     This module seeks to develop a detailed understanding of the internal operating mechanisms of semiconductor electronic and opto-electronic devices. You’ll focus on devices based on pn junctions (e.g. diodes, bipolar junction transistors) and devices based on MOS capacitors (eg memory cells, CCD detectors, MOSFETs). The module will consider how the targeted application for a device impacts upon its design. (For example, signal-mixing diodes, power diodes, light-emitting diodes and solar cells are all based upon the pn diode, but provide very different functionality.) The characteristics required of these devices will be discussed in relation to their incorporation into appropriate electronic systems. You’ll have two 1-hour lectures each week for study of this module, supplemented with example sheets. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    VLSI Design 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to the principles of semi-custom and full custom design of integrated circuits (IC) for digital electronic systems, the module is based around the Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) integrated circuit process that is used to fabricate the majority of ICs in production today. The module provides insight into the issues involved in IC design through the analysis of examples based around logic gates. Layout design techniques for CMOS logic gates are covered. You’ll have one 2-hour lecture and one 2-hour CAD laboratory per week for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Industrial Awareness 
   
   
   
     This module is taught via a number of full day workshops devoted to industrially relevant subjects, run jointly by departmental staff and industrial colleagues. Coursework will be set following each workshop. Activities will include: group work, role playing, presentations, decision making, information gathering, literature searches, strategy formulation and preparation of a summary report. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Fields Waves and Antennas 
   
   
   
     This module presents and develops the basic analytical, computational and experimental tools used in the study of electromagnetic fields and waves at high frequency. Topics covered include: waves on transmission lines, Maxwell's equations and plane electromagnetic wave propagation, power flow, methods for electromagnetic field computation and an introduction to antennas. You’ll have two 1-hour lectures each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Group Project 
   
   
   
     Working in groups of between four and six, under the supervision of a member of academic staff, you’ll work on projects encompassing a broad range of engineering skills, involving the design, analysis and evaluation of systems or engineering problems. Assessment of the societal impact of the outcome will form part of the requirement of the project. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Telecommunication Electronics 
   
   
   
     This module covers the design and analysis of electronic systems used in telecommunications particularly wireless devices. Systems covered include: amplifiers, oscillators, phase-locked loops and mixers. You’ll have two 1-hour lectures and two 1-hour practicals each week to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
  
    Mathematics for Engineering Management 
   
   
   
     This module examines and classifies various (non-statistical) management and operational research problems and their formulation and techniques for solution. Techniques introduced and used concentrate on operations research problems such as linear programming (LP), dynamic programming and nonlinear programming problems. Each week there will normally be one 1-hour lecture and a two-hour workshop to introduce key mathematical knowledge on module topics. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Mathematical Techniques in Ordinary Differential Equations for Engineers 
   
   
   
     This module covers advanced analytic mathematical techniques used to provide exact or approximate solutions to common classes of ordinary differential equations (ODES) typical in Engineering. Techniques covered include: method of variation of parameters, Laplace transform methods, Taylor series method, Frobenius method, asymptotic regular perturbations and strained coordinates and multiple scales. Each week there will normally be one 1-hour lecture and a two-hour workshop to introduce key mathematical knowledge on module topics. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Mathematical Techniques in Partial Differential Equations for Engineers 
   
   
   
     Covering a variety of analytic techniques for solving partial differential equations, topics include: characteristic methods, separation of variables, transform methods (Fourier and Laplace), similarity methods and D’Alembert’s solution and Duhamel’s principle. Each week there will normally be one 1-hour lecture and a two-hour workshop to introduce key mathematical knowledge on module topics. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Computerised Mathematical Methods in Engineering 
   
   
   
     The methodology and associated numerical techniques are introduced to enable a selection of mathematical operations to be evaluated with the use of computer-based software algorithms to problems that cannot be solved analytically. Topics include: introduction to concepts of numerical analysis, quadrature and curve fitting, numerical linear algebra, qualitative and finite-difference methods for ODEs and numerical methods for solving PDEs. Each week there will normally be one 1-hour lecture and a two-hour workshop to introduce key mathematical knowledge on module topics. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Power Networks 
   
   
   
     This module provides you with an understanding of power system apparatus and their behaviour under normal and fault conditions. Through a two hour lecture each week, you’ll cover topics such as: concept and analysis of load flow, voltage/current symmetrical components, computation of fault currents, economic optimisation, power-system control and stability, power system protection and power quality. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Electrical Machines 
   
   
   
     This module provides you with an understanding of the operational characteristics of common electrical machines (dc, ac induction, ac synchronous and stepping). Both theoretical and practical characteristics are covered including: electromagnetic theory applied to electrical machines, principles and structure of dc machines - commutation effects, principles and structure of induction machines, principles and structure of synchronous machines, parameterisation for performance prediction and machine testing and evaluation. You’ll have two 1-hour lectures per week, supplemented with practical demonstrations for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Control Systems Design 
   
   
   
     This module enables you to design both analogue and digital controllers for linear single-input single-output systems. You’ll have access to CAD control design packages for evaluating control design. Through three 1-hour lectures per week, you’ll cover topics such as: design of analogue controllers using Root Locus Method; closed loop performance and frequency response; microprocessor implementation; practical problems in digital control; design of digital controllers using z-plane techniques and practice with CAD package. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Digital Communications 
   
   
   
     This module is an introduction to the operation of modern digital communication systems. During two 1-hour lectures each week, you’ll cover topics such as: communication systems, information content and channel capacity, digital modulation techniques, data compression techniques, error-correcting and line coding techniques, digital signal regeneration techniques and system examples (FAX, Teletext, NICAM and CD technologies). 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Energy Conversion for Motor and Generator Drives 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to the concepts and operating principles of variable speed electric motor drives systems, you’ll use a number of system examples to demonstrate how the drive systems are specified, designed, controlled and operated. You’ll have a two-hour lecture each week for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Power Electronic Design 
   
   
   
     Providing an understanding of the operational principles of power electronic converters and their associated systems, this module covers: 3-phase naturally commutated ac-dc/dc-ac converters, capacitive and inductive smoothing - device ratings, dc-ac PWM inverters and modulation strategies, resonant converters, high power factor utility interface circuits and power converter topologies for high power (multilevel). You’ll have two 1-hour lectures per week  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Web Based Computing 
   
   
   
     This module introduces the Java programming language, and the net Beans IDE as tools to develop applications for devices from mobile phones, to the web. You’ll have one 1-hour lecture and one 2-hour laboratory session each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Digital Video Communication Systems 
   
   
   
     Providing insight into the issues concerned with implementing a practical digital communication system, this module uses digital television as an example of a complex digital system. Topics covered include: encoding, dithering and quantization, data compression techniques, data transmission, modulation techniques and the associated technologies. You’ll spend 2 hours in lectures and have a one 1-hour  practical.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Embedded Computing 
   
   
   
     This module aims to introduce principal generic and distinctive features of embedded computing, and develop practical skills in designing firmware for PIC16 microcontrollers. You’ll have a two-hour lecture each week for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Microwave Communications 
   
   
   
     This module provides an overview of microwave telecommunication systems. Topics cover characteristics of atmosphere and ionosphere, microwaves in free space (the link equation, satellite communications, microwave radio links, remote sensing (RADAR)), microwave waveguides and devices (coaxial cable, microstrip/ striplines, rectangular and circular waveguides, periodic structures and filters), transmission line equivalents of microwave circuits, matrix representation of microwave networks (transfer matrix, scattering matrix) and impedance matching. For this module you’ll have a two-hour lecture per week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    IT Infrastructure 
   
   
   
     Providing you with the skills required to commission a complete IT system, this module provides information on network design and implementation, services, security and management of systems. You’ll be introduced to new uses of IT infrastructure (eg VoIP) and spend one 1-hour lecture for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Engineering Software: Design and Implementation 
   
   
   
     Providing you with an understanding of the design patterns and data structures that are in use in modern software packages, you’ll learn to perform critical analyses of complex design tasks and to decompose them into manageable and maintainable parts. In addition, the emergence of parallel programming techniques will be discussed and practical design choices and implementations analysed. You’ll have one 2-hour lecture per week. 
      
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Industrial/Research Orientated Project 
   
   
   
     You’ll work on an individual project of direct industrial or research relevance which will usually be undertaken in collaboration with a suitable company. The normal expectation is that the project specification will be drawn up following consultation between you, your project supervisor and an advisor at the collaborating company. You’ll work under the supervision of a member of staff with weekly individual tutorials and where appropriate will maintain contact with the collaborating company through meetings and visits. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional  In your fourth year there are over 30 modules you may choose from in the following areas:
   
   
    Business, Marketing and Finance   
    Advanced Technologies   
    Advanced Power Systems   
    Control Systems   
    Mobile and Computational Designs  
   The following list is a selection of the possible options you have; for more information, please contact the 
  department.
   
   
  
    Introduction To Finance 
   
   
   
     You’ll be introduced to basic corporate and personal finance concepts, including the time value of money, financial markets, shares and bonds, financial risk and return, raising money, and the elements of investment. You’ll spend around two hours in lectures and have a one-hour workshop per week for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Science, Technology & Business 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to the importance of, and the processes involved in the commercialisation of science and technology, the content of this module is highly relevant in the current climate where Government is placing much evidence on the wealth creation process. The aims of the module will achieved by a combination of  experiential learning via lectures and seminars each week.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    RF Microelectronics with project 
   
   
   
     In this module, you’ll discuss the design of high speed Analogue and Digital circuits before the limitations of BJTs and MOSFETs are given. You’ll also examine High speed HEMT and HBTs through spending two hours in lectures each week and project work. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Photonic Communications Components 
   
   
   
     This module introduces the principles and application of a wide range of photonic devices, currently used in photonics telecoms. Some of the specific topics covered include: carrier transport and recombination processes in semiconductors; light-emitting diodes (LEDs); laser diodes (both for signal sources and amplifier pumps); LED and laser diode modulation (rate equation descriptions, equivalent circuits, modulation and small-signal performance analysis); APD and PIN diode detectors; detector response (sensitivity, bandwidth and noise). You’ll have a two-hour lecture each week to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Bioelectronic and Biophotonic Interfacing 
   
   
   
     This module explores the design of interfaces between technology and biology. It will cover the use of a variety of physical phenomena, including electrical and optical signals, to both monitor and control biological systems. Technology used in research laboratories, medical diagnostic equipment and personal electronic devices will be considered. The module will emphasise the design of practical technology and will be taught through a two-hour lecture delivered each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Power Conversion 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to dynamic modelling techniques for switching power converters, you’ll cover the requirements of and design of control loops for switching power converters as well as properties and operation of load resonant power converters. You’ll have five 4-hour lectures to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Power Systems for Aerospace, Marine and Automotive Applications 
   
   
   
     This module aims to develop an understanding of the design and operation of power systems in aerospace, marine and automotive applications. With the introduction of more electrical technologies in these application areas, the understanding and expected performance of the power system has become a critical platform design issue. You’ll have five blocks of four hour lectures to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Instrumentation and Measurement with Project 
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to develop a broad understanding of instrumentation techniques which are used in a wide range of engineering applications. Topics taught will include: the physics and mathematics of sensor action, measurement errors and their control, data conditioning and conversion hardware and relevant signal processing techniques. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week as well as completing coursework for study of this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Optical Communications and Networks 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to the concepts and operating principles of optical communication systems, the devices (and fibre) which underpin them and the networks they can be used to form. You’ll have a weekly two-hour lecture and one 1-hour examples class for study of this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Computational Engineering 
   
   
   
     This module covers the development of advanced engineering software projects, spanning a range of application areas. Generic topics to be discussed include: Large-scale software management, robust design and coding techniques, accurate and efficient numerical computing for technological simulations, parallel computing techniques applicable to several classes of parallel computer e. multicore, distributed and graphics processing unit (GPU) based systems, database design and implementation. You’ll have a two-hour lecture each week to study for this module.