Modules  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
   Students have a choice of three out of the following four core English modules:   
  
    Language and Context 
   
   
    This module considers the main forms and functions of English vocabulary, grammar and discourse and explores how they are used in real social and cultural contexts. You’ll look at how language is used for different purposes and how people use language to reveal and conceal social realities as well other topics surrounding language and context. For this module you’ll have a one lecture and a one-hour seminar per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Beginnings of English 
   
   
    You will be introduced to the language, literature and culture of medieval England and study Old and Middle English texts. In this module you’ll familiarise yourself with the knowledge needed for the reading and understanding medieval texts. In addition you will be introduced to the basics of medieval grammar and spelling conventions. For this module you’ll have two 1-hour lectures and one 1-hour seminar per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Studying Literature 
   
   
    This module will introduce some of the core skills necessary for literary studies through focusing on specific poetry and prose texts. You will address topics including: close reading, constructing an argument and handling critical materials. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Drama, Theatre, Performance 
   
   
    This module, taught through a combination of practical workshops, seminars, and lectures, considers key concepts in the study of dramatic texts, theatre history and performance. The module frames these concepts, taking into consideration questions about who performs, where, to whom, why and how, through explorations of key moments in the Western theatrical tradition.  
   
  
      
   
      
   From History you will also need to take this core module:  
  
    Learning History 
   
   
    This module will provide you with the learning skills necessary to make the most of your studies in history. You will be introduced to different approaches in the study of history as well as to different understandings of the functions served by engagement with the past. The module aims to encourage more effective learning, bridge the transition from school or college to university, prepare you for more advanced work in the discipline, and enhance the skills listed. You will spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Introduction to the Medieval World, 500-1500 
   
   
    This module provides an introduction to medieval European history in the period 500–1500. It offers a fresh and stimulating approach to the major forces instrumental in the shaping of politics, society and culture in Europe. Through a series of thematically linked lectures and seminars, you will be introduced to key factors determining changes in the European experience over time, as well as important continuities linking the period as a whole. Amongst the topics to be considered are: political structures and organization; social and economic life and cultural developments. You will have a one hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Reformation to Revolution: an introduction to early modern history, 1500–1789 
   
   
    This module introduces you to major issues in the social, political and cultural history of Europe in the early modern period by analysing demographic, religious, social and cultural changes that took place between 1500 and 1789. You will examine the tensions produced by warfare, religious conflict, the changing relationships between rulers, subjects and political elites, trends in socio-economic development and the discovery of the ‘New World’. You will spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Roads to Modernity: an introduction to modern history, 1789-1945 
   
   
    In the first semester, the module provides a chronology of modern history from c.1789–1945 which concentrates principally on key political developments in European and global history such as the French Revolution, the expansion of the European empires and the two World Wars. The second semester will look more broadly at economic, social and cultural issues, such as industrialisation, urbanisation, changing artistic forms and ideological transformations in order to consider the nature of modernity. You will spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    The Contemporary World since 1945 
   
   
    The module surveys and analyses some of the main developments in world affairs since the end of the Second World War. This includes major international events, particularly the course and aftermath of the Cold War, as well as national and regional histories, especially in Europe, East Asia and the Middle East; the module also looks at key political and social movements. Attention is paid to political, economic and social forces, with students spending five hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
    English Options  
   You must choose three modules in English covering at least two of the following areas:     
   Literature 1500 to the present  
   Each of the modules offered will provide a comprehensive introduction to the changes in the genres of prose, poetry and drama across the period studied, placing the works encountered in the context of key aesthetic, social and political/historical contexts.  
   English language and applied linguistics  
   Building on the study of English language undertaken in year one, your second year language modules provide the exciting opportunity for you to explore aspects of language use in the mind, in society and in literature.  
   Medieval languages and literatures  
   You can choose to pursue one or more of the medieval areas introduced in year one, or you can opt to study a new but related area. In all cases you will develop your understanding of language change and variety, registers, styles, modes and genres, as they appear in medieval texts, and become more expert in reading with reference to wider medieval cultures.  
   Drama and performance  
   Year two modules provide the opportunity to develop approaches from the first year by studying 20th and 21st-century theatre; by exploring key critical approaches to drama in theory and practice, and by focusing on a key period in the development of our nation’s theatre.  
   For a sample of typical modules from each area please see our single honours BA English listing.  
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Final Year Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    History Dissertation 
   
  
    This module involves the in-depth study of a historical subject from which you will create a 10,000 word dissertation. You will have regular meetings with your supervisor and a weekly one hour lecture to guide you through this task.
    
    
   
  
      
   
    English Options  
   The final year is when all the different strands of your teaching and learning experience as an undergraduate culminate in the opportunity to demonstrate and apply all the different kinds of skills you have acquired in researching a topic, extended analysis of specialist themes and areas, and in independent study.   
   You will have the opportunity to study a range of authors, genres, linguistic approaches, and textual forms and contexts, in both national and international contexts, thinking about English in the broadest possible terms. You will also have the opportunity to specialise in areas for which you have developed genuine aptitude and passion during your undergraduate career.  
   A typical list of options available can be found on our single honours BA English listing.