Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
      Compulsory  
  
    Creative Writing Practice 
   
   
    The first-year module, Creative Writing Practice, acts as a foundation, focusing on the process of writing fiction, drama and poetry, through various forms of reading, writing and performance practice. You will be encouraged to experiment with techniques and strategies, such as character, dialogue and imagery, to create new work. You will also develop the capacity to reflect on this work in a disciplined and rigorous fashion – an essential skill in creative writing. Creative Writing Practice puts special emphasis on the real-life processes of published writers, including research, collaboration, publication and performance, and how it feels to be interviewed about your writing.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Language and Context 
   
   
    This module considers the main forms and functions of English vocabulary, grammar and discourse and explores how they are used in real social and cultural contexts. You’ll look at how language is used for different purposes and how people use language to reveal and conceal social realities as well other topics surrounding language and context. For this module you’ll have a one-hour lecture and a one-hour seminar per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Beginnings of English 
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to the language, literature and culture of medieval England and study Old and Middle English texts. In this module you’ll familiarise yourself with the knowledge needed for reading and understanding medieval texts. In addition you will be introduced to the basics of grammar and spelling conventions. For this module you’ll have two 1-hour lectures and one 1-hour seminar per week.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Studying Literature 
   
   
    This module will  introduce some of the core skills necessary for literary studies through focus on specific poetry and prose texts. You will address topics including: close reading, constructing an argument and handling critical material. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Drama, Theatre, Performance 
   
   
    This module, taught through a combination of practical workshops, seminars, and lectures, considers key concepts in the study of dramatic texts, theatre history and performance. The module frames these concepts, taking into consideration questions about who performs, where, to whom, why and how, through explorations of key moments in the Western theatrical tradition.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Academic Community 
   
   
    It will provide you with an introduction to key issues and skills for those transitioning to studying English at Nottingham. This module emphasises points of intersection between the diverse disciplines of English and will help to develop a toolkit of study, research and communication skills which can be transferred to other modules. You’ll be taught in small groups with a combination of lectures and tutorials.   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Creative Writing: Craft 
   
   
    As this module develops, the focus shifts from the examination of writing technique to a wider understanding of literary form. You are encouraged to take more initiative in following up on the content of the workshops by experimenting with the conventions covered. Similarly we expect you to develop your reading and to learn directly from the poets, playwrights and novelists who inspire you most.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Creative Writing: Pages and Stages 
   
   
    This module expands on the work completed in Creative Writing Practice in Year 1 and Creative Writing: Craft in Autumn of Year 2 by undertaking various activities in the fields of publication and production, emphasising the relationship between writing and professional practice. Students will explore the roles of institutions and practitioners such as publishers, booksellers, editors, directors, theatre companies, and event/festival organisers, by engaging directly with them in assessed research exercises. They will develop their own creative work in these contexts, considering where and how their work might be produced or published.  
   
  
      
   
     English Options  
   You will have the opportunity to choose from a range of options which will either enable you to continue study in all the areas of English encountered in year one, or to begin to specialise according to your particular interests in literature, language or drama and performance.   
      
   Literature 1500 to the present  
   Each of the modules offered will provide a comprehensive introduction to the changes in the genres of prose, poetry and drama across the period studied, placing the works encountered in the context of key aesthetic, social and political/historical contexts.  
   English Language and Applied Linguistics  
   Building on the study of English language undertaken in year one, your second year language modules provide the exciting opportunity for you to explore aspects of language use in the mind, in society and in literature.  
   Medieval languages and literatures  
   You can choose to pursue one or more of the medieval areas introduced in year one, or you can opt to study a new but related area. In all cases you will develop your understanding of language change and variety, registers, styles, modes and genres, as they appear in medieval texts, and become more expert in reading with reference to wider medieval cultures.  
   Drama and Performance  
   Year two modules provide the opportunity to develop approaches from the first year by studying 20th and 21st-century theatre; by exploring key critical approaches to drama in theory and practice, and by focusing on a key period in the development of our nation’s theatre.  
   For a sample of typical modules from each area please see our single honours BA English listing.  
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Advanced Writing Practice 
   
   
    This module will further develop your skills as a writer through helpful workshops that will be presided over by a tutor. You will engage critically with selected readings and work through both prose and poetry. In addition you will also study various literary tools including narration, character voice, dialogue, plot and setting. These workshops will last two hours a week and by the end of the module you will have more confidence to write on your own.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Creative Writing Dissertation 
   
   
    The dissertation is an independent project involving both creative and critical work. The creative component consists of an original work of either fiction, poetry, or drama, or a combination of two of these genres, to be agreed with your dissertation supervisor. The critical component addresses the main issues involved in the process of developing and revising your creative work.  
   
  
      
   
     You will then choose either the Creativity and Language module or an Independent Research Project with The Letters Page.  
  
    Creativity and Language 
   
   
    This module explores the processes of production, understanding and analysis of creativity in language. It examines the ways in which a systematic knowledge of how language works can assist writers to understand their own and others’ literary work. The module combines practice in creative production with practice in language analysis. Some of the questions we might ask include: what is literariness?; how do we define genius?; what have social media done for creativity?; can we define creativity using words alone? Students will make use of language models from cognitive poetics, creative writing and traditional literary criticism to analyse and understand the concepts of creativity and literariness in writing  
    Weekly lectures by subject specialists will introduce you to unfamiliar concepts, while workshops will focus on practical applications. You will engage in a variety of creative writing, re-writing and reading tasks, discussion and textual analysis. The module will develop your abilities to write creatively, to evaluate your own and others’ writing in a systematic and principled way, and to deepen your experience of literature and the creative processes underlying it.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Independent Research Project with The Letters Page 
   
   
    Four students with an interest in contemporary literature and the publishing industry will be able to gain first-hand practical experience and skills in a small-press context, as well as to explore some of the key challenges facing publishing in the emerging digital age.  
    Students will work alongside Jon McGregor on a range of editorial and production roles for ‘The Letters Page’, the School’s on-line and print literary journal. Tasks may include: editorial assessment, proof-reading, typesetting, correspondence with contributors and subscribers, updating and archiving of digital material, development of social media presence, transcribing non-printed materials. Students will maintain a reflective journal alongside their working practice, detailing the skills they have developed and addressing questions raised by the way the journal responds to changes and challenges in the publishing industry  
   
  
      
   
      
   English Options  The final year is when all the different strands of your teaching and learning experience as an undergraduate culminate in the opportunity to demonstrate and apply all the different kinds of skills you have acquired in researching a topic, extended analysis of specialist themes and areas, and in independent study.    You will have the opportunity to study a range of authors, genres, linguistic approaches, and textual forms and contexts, in both national and international contexts, thinking about English in the broadest possible terms. You will also have the opportunity to specialise in areas for which you have developed genuine aptitude and passion during your undergraduate career.  
   A typical list of options available can be found on our single honours BA English listing.