Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  Typical year one modules  
  Core  
 
   Careers Skills for Geographers 
  
  
   
    Self-marketing and CVs  
    Preparing for interviews and assessment  
    Careers for geographers  
    Subject-focused vocational talk  
    Postgraduate study (masters and PhD)   
    Guest lectures (eg. from Royal Geographical Society - Institute of British Geographers)   
    Career planning   
   
   Topics will be delivered by the school's Career Advisor from the Careers and Employability Service (CES) and academics from the School of Geography.  
   Importantly, you will be expected to make regular use of the Careers and Employability Service (CES) to assist with progress during the year and attend a range of employer presentations and other events (eg. employer fairs).  
   The module aims to:  
   
    introduce the issues of career education and employability within the Geography undergraduate curriculum  
    develop and enhance the students' key skills for use in seeking work experience, graduate employment and postgraduate opportunities   
    provide students with the opportunity to critically evaluate and reflect on their personal and key skill development in the School of Geography and the University   
    inform students of the role of the Careers and Employability Service (CES)  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Earth and Environmental Dynamics 
  
  
   This module integrates knowledge taken from the atmosphere, oceans and continents to inform an understanding of global physical systems as they affect people and the environment. The module considers:  
   
    principles of climate and general circulation patterns in the atmosphere and ocean   
    principles of Earth and geomorphological systems  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide an understanding of the atmosphere and hydrosphere   
    develop knowledge of the terrasphere through learning about geoscience and geomorphology  
    provide a platform for interpreting geographical and environmental issues  
   
   On completion of the module, the students will have developed an ability to think analytically about physical and geomorphological processes and understand, synthesise and critically evaluate current debates on environmental issues within a broader conceptual and scientific framework.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Foundation Mathematics 
  
  
   This year-long module is designed to enable students who have not taken A-level Maths to extend their knowledge to A-level standard. You will acquire knowledge and competence of core mathematical topics and gain experience of relevant quantitative aspects.  
   Topics include:  
   
    Algebra and algebraic manipulation  
    Linear algebra  
    Functions and trigonometry  
    Differential calculus  
    Integral calculus  
    Simple modelling  
    Elementary probability and statistics.   
   
   You'll have around three hours of workshops per week to work with tutors and other students to aide your understanding of the material covered.  
  
 
     
  
 OR 
 
   Calculus and Linear Algebra 
  
  
   Students will A-level Maths take this year-long module which consolidates basic theory from previous knowledge of mathematics and extends to more advanced topics in the calculus of several variables. In addition, the basic concepts of complex numbers, vector and matrix algebra are established to provide an introduction to vector spaces.  
   An emphasis in the module is to develop general skills and confidence in applying the methods of calculus and developing techniques and ideas that are widely applicable and used in subsequent modules. You'll have a two-hour lecture weekly as well as tutorials and workshops to help aide your understanding of the topics covered.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Geographical Field Course 
  
  
   A four day intensive residential field study period. Teaching will concentrate on the rationale and techniques of field study in both human and physical aspects of geography. Particular emphasis is placed on the design, practice and analysis of small research projects based on geographical issues.  
   The aims of this module are to:  
   
    provide a field course experience away from Nottingham   
    provide the opportunity to evaluate issues involved in applying research design and execution skills within the specific context of field-based research  
    provide the opportunity to evaluate field based techniques and approaches to the collection of geographical information   
    foster an awareness of the ethical issues related to data gathering   
    foster a culture of safe field work through awareness, management and practice of both general and specific safety issues  
    develop skills of risk assessment related to field work   
    further develop intellectual and communication skills gained with tutorials  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Geographic Information Systems 
  
  
   The module provides students with the theoretical background and practical training to undertake basic spatial analysis within a contemporary Geographic Information System (GIS).   
   It aims to ensure competency in the use of a contemporary GIS software package whilst developing transferable ICT skills. It also encourages students to develop the analytical skills necessary for the creation of workflows that utilise the built-in analytical functionality of a GIS to solve a spatial problem.   
   Specific topics covered are:   
   
    What is GIS?  
    Cartographic principles behind GIS  
    Spatial data models and database management systems  
    Fundamental spatial analysis  
    Creating maps within a GIS  
   
   This module aims to develop the fundamental practical and conceptual skills necessary to undertake simple GIS analysis, and the theoretical and practical competency necessary to study GIS at a higher level.   
   It aims to introduce the student to commercially available software, instruct students in the use of this software in applied GIS analysis scenarios and ensures a solid theoretical and conceptual foundation in GIS fundamental methods and analyses.  
  
 
     
  
 
   On Earth and Life 
  
  
   On Earth and Life explores the deep historical co-evolution of Earth and Life and emphasises uniqueness of place and historical contingency. The module leads on from and complements Physical Landscapes of Britain in exploring geological, plate tectonic and palaeoenvironmental ideas and research, but at the global scale.  
   The module also prepares the ground for and contextualises several second and third year geography modules, especially Environmental Change and Patterns of Life.  
   The aim of the module is to encourage students to explore the history of the Earth and life, as well as the history of ideas about the nature and evolution of the Earth's surface and the evolution and biogeography of plants, animals and humans.  
   On completing the module, students should know more about the evolution of the Earth and life and be able to assess critically the ideas and methods of researchers in the historical and geographical sciences.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Orientation and Study Skills 
  
  
   This module covers:  
   
    Orientation: academic study at University and in the School of Geography   
    Advanced study skills: The academic craft, introduction to studying effectively  
    Advanced study skills consolidation: Information - sources, quality, referencing  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce newly enrolled students to studying in the School of Geography  
    equip students with the knowledge and skills required to perform well at University level in the School of Geography  
    impart understanding of the nature and craft of University-level study  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Physical Landscapes of Britain 
  
  
   This module provides an understanding of the history and origins of the Earth and its life and landforms through consideration of the following topics:  
   
    Origins of the Earth   
    Development of life over geological time  
    Environmental changes over geological time  
    Field trip to the Peak District (full costs will be supplied nearer the time of the trip)  
   
   The aim of this module is to provide an understanding of the history and origins of the Earth and its life and landforms. Particular attention is paid to the way in which the area of Britain has formed via tectonic and geomorphological processes. Both systematic and regional approaches are used, with a number of case studies being presented.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Tutorial 
  
  
   Small group tutorials in both the Autumn and Spring semesters in which emphasis will be placed on discussion, essay writing and seminar presentations which will be based on topics in the Qualifying Year geography modules and from broader intellectual, cultural and political fields.  
   The aims of the module are to:  
   
    develop intellectual skills in small-group tutorials based on topics in Qualifying Year geography and from wider intellectual, cultural and political fields   
    develop skills of problem recognition and definition   
    develop powers to identify and evaluate approaches to problem-solving  
    develop skills of information collection and synthesis and evaluate the significance and relevance of information  
    develop powers of reasoning, discussion and cogent argument  
    develop communication skills in the form of essay writing, verbal articulation of ideas and issues through group discussions and seminar presentations  
   
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year two modules  
  Core  
 
   Dissertation Preparation 
  
  
   This module is taught by formal lectures, scheduled preliminary fieldwork, supervision meetings with dissertation tutor. It covers the following:  
   
    Introduction to the dissertation process and procedures   
    What is a dissertation?   
    Ethics, risk and safety implications when conducting Geographical research   
    Preparing a dissertation proposal   
    Analysing material   
    Critically reflecting on literature and writing a coherent literature review   
    Evaluation of past dissertations  
   
   The aims of this module are to prepare undergraduate geography students for undertaking their 40 credit dissertation which is a significant piece of supervised research that includes working in the field, collecting primary and/or secondary data, conducting a literature review, undertaking independent research and writing their research up to produce a significant piece of original scholarship.  
   The module will equip students with an understanding of research design and methodology, will explore the nature of the dissertation and how to select a topic, determine appropriate methodologies and methods of analysis and will explain the ethical, risk and safety frameworks under which dissertations are undertaken. The module will detail the timetable, procedures and processes that students need to follow in order to complete the dissertation.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Mineralogy and Petrology 
  
  
   The module will consider:  
   
    Economic mineral deposits  
    Hydrocarbon resources  
    Environmental mineralogy, eg. radioactive waste management, shale gas  
    Volcanology and volcanic hazards  
   
   Specifically the module will include discussion of:  
   
    Major rock types and rock-forming   
    Bulk materials   
    Types of ore deposit, how they form, and the important ore minerals and critical metals  
    Types of oil and gas reservoirs, traps, seals, burial diagenesis and hydrocarbon migration  
    Environmental mineralogy and geochemistry, covering carbon capture and storage technology and radioactive waste management  
   
   The aim of this module is to introduce students to the major different rock types and the rock-forming minerals from which they are made.   
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Tutorial 
  
  
   This module will cover the breadth of world-leading research being carried out in the School of Geography and is reflected in the school's research themes.  
   The two lectures will introduce the role, breadth and practice of research in geography. Joint delivered by researchers on the physical and human sides of the discipline, the lectures will examine the epistemological and philosophical bases of research in geography, with a focus on the diversity but also shared, unifying features of geographical research, providing broader context for the small group tutorials.  
   Each student will be assigned to a small tutorial group for the semester and will participate in tutorials with a different member of staff. Specific topics will be chosen by staff members based on their own, active, research programs and will reflect the leading research questions and problems in the discipline. Students will be supplied with a set of readings prior to each tutorial. Students will also be required to research the background context of the readings.  
   This module will expose students to the breadth and depth of research undertaken in geography. The module aims to develop a critical appreciation of contemporary research problems in geography and introduce students to alternative approaches to geographical research.  
   Students will benefit through discussing the complete research process, from idea and project development, to methods, dissemination and evaluation of research in geography.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Sedimentology and Palaeontology 
  
  
   Students will be given a comprehensive course on sedimentology and palaeontology and how they are used scientifically and industrially together with their impact on human society and the natural environment.  
   The aim of this module is to introduce students to sedimentology/sedimentary geology (the study of sediments such as sand, silt and clay and the processes that result in their deposition) and palaeontology [the study of fossils (both animal and plant, and both macroscopic and microscopic)].  
  
 
     
  
 
   Techniques in Physical Geography 
  
  
   This module presents the opportunity for hands-on experience of laboratory, field and surveying techniques in physical geography appropriate to the domain of interest of the participants. To achieve these aims all students participate in six field projects on a eight day field course, some of which are completed in the laboratory back in Nottingham.  
   In addition, students choose further laboratory techniques to investigate in the second semester, leading to an individual project. The ethical, safety and fieldwork limitations of geographical work are also considered.  
   The aim of this module is to provide training in physical geography field and laboratory techniques.  
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   Desert Geomorphology 
  
  
   This module addresses the research issues and problems in desert environments. The module opens with a definition of deserts environments and a description of the characteristic features of deserts around the world. Key topics include:  
   
    The nature of deserts, aridity and drylands   
    Sediment production and weathering processes   
    Sediment entrainment by wind   
    The formation of sand dunes and dust deposits   
    Desert surfaces  
    The role of water  
   
   Throughout the module emphasis is placed upon past and current research including experimental design.  
   This module aims to provide:  
   
    an understanding of the geomorphology of desert environments   
    an ability to critically evaluate contested theories of desert landform development  
    an ability to evaluate the impact of vegetation and climate in desert processes  
    a foundation of skills and knowledge for further study of desert environments  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Digital Explorers 
  
  
   This module provides a consideration of:  
   
    Introduction to GI Science/Systems/Studies/Services   
    Spatial Data Types and Sources   
    Vector Processing Algorithms   
    Raster Processing Algorithms  
    Spatial Analysis and Decision Making   
    Professional Training in ArcGIS   
    Project planning, implementation and reporting  
   
   The aim of this module is to produce students that have both theoretical and technical competence in the use of GIS software for spatial data analysis. It encompasses both taught instruction and project based learning to ensure that students have sufficient skills to independently develop, justify, undertake and report a complex GIS-based analysis project in response to a project brief.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Environmental Change 
  
  
   This module considers the mechanisms for, and evidence of, global environmental change during the timescale of the Quaternary period. The nature, causes and impacts of change are evaluated in the context of the available evidence within a range of natural and human environments. The nature and impacts of future climate change are also considered.  
   This module aims to provide:  
   
    an understanding of the mechanisms driving global change at a range of different timescales  
    a knowledge of the existence and limitations of evidence for change  
    an appreciation of sources of information on this topic and how to integrate this knowledge into cogent written and oral arguments related to Quaternary environmental change  
    an ability to evaluate the nature of change from literature-based evidence  
    a foundation of skills and knowledge for further study of Quaternary environments and proxy records of change  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Patterns of Life 
  
  
   The module focuses on patterns in the distribution of organisms in space and time, and theories proposed to explain those patterns. The main themes are:  
   
    Biodiversity patterns   
    Island biogeography and nature conservation theory  
    Ecological succession  
    Biological invasions  
    Extinction and mass extinctions  
    Quaternary refugia and the palaeoecological record  
    The process of biogeographical research  
   
   The main aims of this module are to develop:  
   
    a broad knowledge of biogeographic patterns  
    an understanding of the theories proposed to explain these patterns  
    an ability to understand and interpret the biogeographic literature experience of biogeographical research  
   
   The primary focus is on patterns manifest at global spatial scales and long temporal scales. This knowledge is the basis for:  
   
    appropriate interpretation of human impacts on the environment  
    understanding and evaluating nature conservation theory and practice  
    understanding of the diversity and interdependence of the natural world  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   River Processes and Dynamics 
  
  
   Introduces the fluid and sediment processes that operate in rivers and describes the characteristic channel forms of alluvial channels and the links between process and form. Uses laboratory practicals and a fieldtrip to deliver student centred learning and supplement teaching through lectures. Topics covered include:  
   
    Foundations of fluvial geomorphology  
    Flow resistance, sediment transport and bank erosion  
    Introduction to biogeomorphology and aquatic ecology  
    Dominant discharge and hydraulic geometry  
    Laboratory practicals  
    Fieldtrip: fluvial processes and forms in the Hawkcombe catchment, Somerset   
    Spaces and timescales of river change   
    River planforms: braided, meandering and straight   
    Morphological adjustments in an unstable channels   
    Complex response in the fluvial system  
   
   This module assumes no prior knowledge in introducing the fundamentals of fluid flow, sediment transport and bank erosion in rivers. Semester one builds on the underpinning science of open channel flow to examine the processes that lead to channel formation and the creation and maintenance of acquatic habitat.  
   At the beginning of semester two, the mechanics and concepts covered are brought together through consideration of regime theory and hydraulic geometry in alluvial channels. Semester two also deals with the dynamics of rivers with straight, meandering and braided patterns. It goes on to investigate trends of change exhibited by unstable rivers and how simple disturbances can trigger complex responses in the fluvial system.   
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year three modules  
  Core  
 
   Dissertation BSc 
  
  
   This is an individual project based on a geographical topic involving fieldwork and/or secondary data, and agreed by the candidate with their tutor and a specialist supervisor.  
   The aims are:  
   
    Developing skills of problem recognition and definition  
    Raising awareness of and responding to the ethical issues related to gathering data  
    Implementing risk assessment skills related to fieldwork and developing a culture of safety and appropriate research practices  
    The opportunity to develop and apply research design and investigation skills in a field-based environment   
    Enhance skills of information collection and synthesis, and the ability to evaluate the significance and relevance of information  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   Advances in Remote Sensing 
  
  
   The anticipated content and structure is:  
   Part I - Principles and Systems  
   
    Introduction: the past, present and the future  
    Electromagnetic radiation and the terrestrial environment  
    Interaction of radiation with matter   
    Interaction of radiation with matter   
    Sensing systems from a range of vantage points   
    Remote sensing scale and data selection issues   
    Using remote sensing data I, II and III   
   
   Part II - Information Extraction  
   
    Exploiting advances in the spatial, spectral and temporal domains   
    Exploiting strengths of data: data fusion   
    Technological innovations   
    Integrating remote sensing and GIS   
    Practising remote sensing   
    Student led assessment  
   
   The aim of the module is to provide an advanced study into the rapidly evolving field of remote sensing. The module will cover the basic physical principles of remote sensing, key remote sensing systems, digital image processing and applications.  
   The main focus of the module is on the remote sensing of the terrestrial environment using a range of sensors, at a range of vantage points. The students will be taken to the research frontier within the discipline with exposure to the current issues, for example, use of volunteered information, terrestrial and atmospheric carbon accounting and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).  
  
 
     
  
 
   Environmental Informatics and Modelling 
  
  
   This module will expose students to current practices, technologies and ideas existing at the forefront of environmental modelling. The module offers an opportunity for students to experience the theory and practice associated with key developments that are occurring in major modelling domains and the most recent advances from the research community.  
   Hands-on experience of using machine-learning software and developing data-driven models will be an integral part of the learning experience.  
   The module will comprise four parts. Part one is composed entirely of 1-hour lectures, with parts two-four incorporating an alternating programme of lecture and practical classes.  
   
    Introduction   
    Modelling the Impacts of Climate Change   
    Modelling Biogeography   
    Hydroinformatics  
   
   This module will expose students to current practices, technologies and ideas existing at the forefront of environmental modelling. The module offers an opportunity for students to experience the theory and practice associated with key developments that are occurring in major modelling domains and the most recent advances from the research community.  
   Hands-on experience of using machine-learning software and developing data-driven models will be an integral part of the learning experience.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Geospatial Technologies: Mobile, Augmented and Virtual 
  
  
   This module focuses on the uptake of digital Geographic Information across a wide range of applications in society and the research agenda that is underpinning these developments. We will explore the use of location-aware mobile devices and techniques for geo-visualization that are visually immersive and interactive. Content is organised as follows:  
   Part I: Digital Geographic Information in the public domain  
   Here we consider how a convergence of technologies (positioning, communication and processing) has allowed digital geographic information to make an impact 'beyond the desktop' at both a global scale through the web, and at a personal scale via the mobile device. This includes Virtual Globes, 'open' and 'linked' geographic information, Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI), Location Based Services, and mobile geospatial apps.  
   Part II: Virtual Geographic Environments  
   Here we look at the role and impact of multi-dimensional geographic visualisation to support decision making, environmental impact assessment, and the communication of spatial context. This includes animation and 3D graphics, advances in data capture, urban and rural landscape visualisation, interaction design and immersion, Augmented and Virtual Realities.  
   The module aims to give students an understanding of the way digital Geographic Information is being used in the public domain, in particular in connection with location-aware mobile devices and multi-dimensional geo-visualization techniques.  
   The module encourages students to think critically about how geospatial technologies can be made to work effectively in these areas, and the research challenges that exist in terms of design and human computer interaction, and the way geography can work alongside other disciplines in this rapidly expanding field.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Global Climate Change 
  
  
   
    A review of modern climate systems and forcings  
    Climate modelling, projections of future climate change and their uncertainty  
    Controversies around climate change, the argument between believers and sceptics and the ways in which climate change is communicated to and perceived by the public   
    The impact of climate change on the world's physical and built environments, water and food resources, and human health  
    Mitigation and adaptation to future climate change including the role played by policy markers and NGOs  
   
   The aim of this module is to introduce students to the science and issues that surround present and future climate change and its impacts on human society and the natural environment. The module will cover the scientific basis for global climate change together with its impact on society, policy, mitigation and adaptation.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Quaternary Environments (Mexico Field Course) 
  
  
   This module considers the Quaternary evolution and settlement history of the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico, building explicitly on material covered in F82165 (Environmental Change). The focus of the course will be evolution of the present climate and environment of the lowland tropics and the interaction between the natural environment and human societies.  
   The module is based on a residential field trip to the Yucatan and project work associated with this. The main elements are:  
   
    An overview of climate dynamics in the tropics, with particular emphasis on changes in the monsoon, the impact of sea level change and drivers of change from mid-latitudes   
    Critical review of methods of environmental reconstruction and dating techniques   
    Archives of change relevant to the study area, primarily lakes and cave systems   
    Quaternary history of the Yucatan   
    Mesoamerican archaeology and cultural change in the Yucatan   
    Exploration of the possible role of climate in driving societal change  
   
   The aim of this module is to explore the nature of the Quaternary in different parts of the world and then to use the lowlands of the Yucatan peninsula to explore the relationship between climate, environment and society exploiting the region's unequalled archaeological record. There will be a particular focus on the period from the mid-Holocene, when the area was occupied by the Maya.   
  
 
     
  
 
   River Management and Restoration 
  
  
   This module further develops themes of river processes and dynamics introduced in module F82164 and considers them within the context of human attempts to manage and restore rivers. It initially centres on changes in the fluvial system that occur in response to river management and engineering and then goes on to examine approaches to restoring the natural functions of rivers that have been heavily degraded by human impacts.  
   The module includes reviews of past and present river channel restoration and rehabilitation activity in Europe and the USA. It details principles by which rehabilitation practice is guided, and introduces criteria for selection between rehabilitation strategies.  
   The module includes a residential field trip in semester one and a non-residential field trip in semester two, where students will have the opportunity to explore a range of river management and restoration issues relevant to rivers in the UK and develop practical skills in field survey and modelling techniques employed in contemporary river management.  
   The module aims for students to:  
   
    Appreciate recent developments in conservation-orientated river management  
    Stress the importance of retaining the physical integrity of river systems as the appropriate basis for sustainable river management  
    Raise awareness of the range, type and methods of river rehabilitation  
    Develop knowledge and critical evaluative skills to propose a rehabilitation design appropriate to a field-based example  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Scale and Diversity in the Canary Islands 
  
  
   The module involves study in Nottingham on secondary data relating to broad-scale patterns of diversity, endemism and evolution in the Canary Islands.  
   This module completes the biogeography pathway in the School of Geography. The broad aim of the module is to encourage students to apply knowledge, concepts and theoretical ideas studied in F81125 (Earth and Environmental Dynamics) and F82163/F82228/F82328 (Patterns of Life) at a range of spatial scales within a professional research context and to communicate research findings at a professional level.