Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. Modules followed for years one, two and three are the same as for the BSc degree.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Global Environmental Processes 
   
   
   
     Through a two hour weekly lecture, you’ll be given a general understanding of the physical, chemical and biological development of the Earth since the start of the Universe, as well as of the cyclical movement of the major materials such as carbon and nitrogen between biological and non-biological forms. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Science and Society 
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to the role and limitations of environmental science within the context practical environmental decision making. The three themes of the module which will be illustrated through a series of environmental case studies are: 1. General scientific methods. 2. The limits and assumptions of science 3. The social context of science based decision making. You’ll have a two hour lecture each week to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Geoscience 
   
   
   
     Through lectures and practicals, the aim of this module is to provide you with basic geological skills and the capacity to understand and interpret geological information. It also aims to provide knowledge of geology in the context of environmental science. Topics covered include bulk properties of the earth, minerals, igneous rocks, sedimentary rocks, metamorphic rocks, geological time, tectonics, geological structures, map interpretation, geological hazards and resource geology.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Ecology of Natural and Managed Ecosytems 
   
   
   
     Pollinator species are hugely important for natural systems and for managed systems like agriculture, but there is concern that numbers are declining. What physical, chemical or biotic factors are limiting these species’ distribution? What other species are they in competition with? How diverse or stable is the ecological community overall? This module introduces you to the principles of ecology and looks at how organisms have evolved to interact with their environment. You’ll also cover population (such as competition and predation) and community ecology (such as the diversity and stability of communities, patterns of species richness). You’ll explore the various definitions of biodiversity and look at the loss of species and habitats, particularly in semi-natural and managed habitats such as woodland, hedgerows, meadows, and agricultural land. You’ll have lectures from current researchers in the field and the opportunity to apply your learning in the laboratory and through field visits.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Dissertation in Environmental Science 
   
   
   
     In lectures and tutorials, this module will enable you to use the library and other sources to retrieve information; read, understand and synthesise primary literature; produce a literature review within a specified word limit; develop your written presentation skills within the constraints of an editorial system and manage and organise your time.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plant Science  
   
   
    How can mutant plants be used to improve crop yield? In this module you’ll be introduced to plant evolution and the cellular structure of plants, in particular seeds, leaves, flowers and roots, and how these multicellular tissues are constructed. You’ll become familiar with the techniques used to study plant science, including genetics and the use of mutants. Using model plants, such as Arabidopsis, you’ll look at the development of modern plant biology and genetics and then explore the applications of biotechnology in plant science. You’ll also examine the importance of plant nutrition and how the interaction with pathogens is crucial to plant growth and production. You’ll have a mix of lectures and practical laboratory sessions to apply your learning.   
   
  
      
   
   Optional   
  
    Grassland Management 
   
   
   
     There’s more to grass than meets the eye. Grasslands are used for forage in agricultural systems but are also important as habitat for wild animals, birds and beneficial insects. In this module you’ll learn about the latest developments in grassland management, both UK and globally, and the policy issues associated with these developments. You’ll examine the morphology and physiology of forage grass species to understand the mechanisms of grass growth, production and utilisation and how these are influenced by management practices. In addition to lectures, you’ll have farm visits and computer-based tutorials so you can develop your understanding of grassland management, identify grass plants and use the latest subject-specific software to calculate a pasture budget.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Anthropology of Human Ecology 
   
   
   
     Following an introduction to the most basic principles of social/cultural anthropology and biological ecology, the module examines the ways in which traditional societies around the world relate to their environments. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures to cover material for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Archaeology 
   
   
   
     This module will concentrate primarily on environmental evidence from or relating to archaeological sites. Techniques such as pollen analysis, the examination of human and animal bones and plant remains contribute to our understanding, and help us interpret the economy and conditions of life in the past. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars and have a two hour workshop to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Managing Tourism & the Environment: Conflict or Consensus? 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll examine and explore: the interactions between and the management of tourism and the environment from the perspective of key stakeholders; debates surrounding the environmental and economic impacts of tourism and the role played by pressure groups in influencing tourism development. You’ll have a 90 minute lecture and spend two hours in seminars each week to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary Agricultural Systems 
   
   
    Modern agriculture is a dynamic, fast-paced and high-tech industry. In this module, you’ll explore practical agricultural systems used by commercial UK farms. Designed for students with a farm or non-farming background, you’ll get to understand the fundamental concepts of agricultural systems within the context of contemporary markets, policy and research. Exact topics covered in the module will vary according to the issues affecting the agricultural industry in any one year, but examples include: dairy production, arable production, soils, agri-environmental interactions, labour and machinery management and farm business systems. You’ll have lectures from academics currently researching these fields and will visit the University Farm and external farms to see what you’ve learnt in practice.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory   
  
    Soil Science 
   
   
   
     This is an introductory module which provides a basic understanding of the nature and properties of soil and the application of soil chemistry, biology and physics to land management and environmental science. Broadly, the topics covered include: soil formation; clay mineralogy; soil organic matter (microbiology and chemistry); soil texture and structure; characteristic soil reactions (acidity, redox); the major and minor plant nutrients (chemistry and microbiology); soil fauna and flora; water relations (irrigation and drainage). You’ll spend around five hours in lectures each week to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Climate Change Science 
   
   
   
     This module presents a broad overview of the science behind climate change and its effects. These topics are: historical climate change; the principles of climate forcing; the role of modelling; responses of aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, including impacts on humans; the political environment; and options for climate stabilization. You’ll have a two hour lecture each week to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Techniques for Environmental Science: Part 1 
   
   
   
     This module provides training in the development of experimental and field survey designs appropriate for environmental scientists together with training and practical experience in undertaking the relevant statistical analyses, presenting and interpreting the results.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Ecosystem Processes 
   
   
   
     This module will focus on the processes that govern terrestrial ecosystem function. You will cover a number of major biomes, with particular emphasis on tropical, temperate and boreal forests, grasslands and arctic tundra. You’ll identify key ecosystem drivers and processes and explore how these have shaped the biosphere. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Hydrogeochemistry 
   
   
   
     Through a three hour weekly lecture, this module outlines the major physico-chemical and biological processes that generate waters of different chemistries at or near the Earth’s surface.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Communicating Environmental Science  
   
   
   
     The overall aim of this module is to consider, and practice, verbally communicating environmental science. You’ll have a weekly four hour lecture to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Techniques for Environmental Science: Part 2 
   
   
   
     This module will require you to develop, test, and interpret an experimental hypothesis (using supplied data) in the context of relevant environmental science applications. You’ll develop your understanding of statistical methods e.g. graphical presentation, anova, regression, multivariate and spatial methods. During an average week you’ll spend two hours in lectures and have a one hour practical.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
    Optional   
  
    Economic Analysis for Agricultural and Environmental Sciences 
   
   
   
     The module aims to equip you with an understanding of economic ideas and principles and to show how these can be used to explain a range of economic problems of interest to Agricultural Scientists. You’ll cover this module through a three hour lecture each week as well as a farm visit to further aide learning. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Science Field Course 
   
   
   
     This residential field course module involves studies of various communities and ecosystems using a range of field techniques to investigate factors which determine the distribution and function of living organisms. The residential component takes place in June at the end of the first year. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Tropical Environmental Science Field Course 
   
   
   
     This residential tropical field course module is based on Tioman Island of the west coast of Peninsular Malaysia and involves studies of various tropical communities and ecosystems using a range of field techniques to investigate factors which determine the distribution and function of living organisms in tropical ecosystems.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plant Physiology: Principles of Resource Capture 
   
   
   
     This module is designed to introduce you to the key processes by which individual plants and plant communities capture and use physical resources i.e. light, water and nutrients, and provides an understanding of the physical and chemical processes and key biological processes involved. By the end of the module, you should understand not only the individual mechanisms, but also appreciate the importance of their integration into whole plant and community processes and the relevance of this to contemporary environmental and agricultural issues. You’ll spend around four hours a week in lectures as well as three hours of practicals to cover material for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Hydrogeochemistry Fieldcourse 
   
   
   
     This module covers: the impact of geology on water chemistry; oil, water sampling and analysis and biotic controls and responses to water chemistry. You’ll have a two hour lecture and three hour practical each week to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Biological Photography and Imaging 1 
   
   
   
     Through practical sessions, you will learn the techniques of biological image production and manipulation, including the ability to generate biological images of the highest technical quality and scientific value. You'll spend around 6 hours per week in lectures studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Patterns of Life 
   
   
   
     This module focuses on patterns in the distribution of organisms in space and time, and the theories proposed to explain these patterns. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Computer Modelling in Science: Introduction 
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to introduce you to the use of computing models in the biological and environmental sciences for simulation and data analysis. You’ll have a two hour lecture and two hour computer class each week to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Rural Environment Geography B 
   
   
   
     Through a weekly two hour lecture, this module will give you a broad knowledge of rural environmental issues in geography. It demonstrates the complexity of scientific and cultural underpinnings of contemporary environmental issues in modern Britain. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    World Agroecosystems  
   
   
   
     This module introduces the range of natural and agricultural species and their geographical distributions. The characteristics of climatic and soil factors that determine the distribution and productivity of contrasting vegetation types are considered. In particular, the present-day distributions and original centres of diversity of the major crop types are considered in terms of natural resources and human interventions. You’ll have a weekly four lecture to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Natural Systems 
   
   
   
     We will consider the principles underlying the structure and higher organisation of natural systems. This encompasses diversity theory, community ecology, ecosystem functioning and biogeography. As this is a rapidly developing area, much of the material is recent and often controversial, so the content is updated every year to keep track of new findings. You’ll have a weekly three hour lecture to cover material for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory   
  
    Research Project in Environmental Science 
   
   
    You will undertake detailed research on a chosen topic after discussion with a supervisor. Each project will involve collection of data by means such as experiment, questionnaire or observation, as well as the analysis and interpretation of the data in the context of previous work.  
    
    Working closely with an academic supervisor, you develop and undertake a research project in your third year. You will present your results orally to your peers and in the form of a concise scientific paper.
     
    
    The project encourages critical thinking and involves a detailed literature survey, data collection, analysis and interpretation.  
    Recent projects include:  
    
     Phytoremediation of contaminated soil  
     The effect of phosphogypsum on soil development  
     Reduction of atmospheric pollutant concentrations by hedgerows  
     Hazard assessment of heavy metal uptake to plants  
     Ecological impacts of veterinary drugs  
     Forest carbon storage and its role in mitigating CO&sup2; emission  
    
    Read BURN the Biosciences Undergraduate Research at Nottingham web pages to find out more about undergraduate research projects. BURN is a freely accessible e-journal which showcases final-year research projects undertaken by biosciences students.   
   
  
      
   
    Optional   
  
    Environmental Pollution Field Course 
   
   
   
     Through a one week field course you’ll gain practical experience of environmental pollution and its long term effects in a heavily polluted area in central Europe. You’ll gain practical experience of foreign field work, working in teams, chain-of-custody issues concerning field samples, in situ and ex situ analysis of samples, oral presentation techniques and report writing. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Arctic Ecology Field Course 
   
   
   
     This module focuses on the function of arctic ecosystems. You’ll identify key terrestrial ecosystem drivers and processes in order to gain a broad understanding of arctic areas. During the field course, you’ll put ecological methodology into practice in projects that analyse landscape patterns and processes in different habitats. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Soil and Water Science  
   
   
   
     You’ll be given a sound understanding of important physical and chemical processes that take place within soils and fresh water systems as well as a basis for the understanding of more applied aspects of the behaviour of these systems (e.g. plant-soil interactions, pollution and its remediation). You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures studying for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Biological Photography and Imaging 2 
   
   
   
     This module extends and develops your skills of creative and critical biological photography. You’ll continue to develop the practice and experience gained in Biological Photography and Imaging 1. You are encouraged to demonstrate increasing expertise in selected subject areas and/or specialist photographic techniques such as digital imaging and manipulation (using Photoshop CS software), digital video photography and editing, ecological and environmental photography, landscapes, macro and long lens photography and specialist lighting. Field and studio work continue to be essential elements of the module. You will have around 6 hours of lectures per week studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Remote Sensing of Environment 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to contemporary remote sensing, you’ll cover the basic physical principles of remote sensing, key remote sensing systems and digital image processing. The main focus of the module is on the remote sensing of the terrestrial environment using satellite sensors. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures studying for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Contaminant Fate and Impact in the Environment 
   
   
   
     The module will use formal lecturing complemented by a laboratory-based practical and a half day field trip to give you background to environmental contaminants. You’ll gain a qualitative and quantitative understanding of the fate and impacts of organic, inorganic and radioactive contaminants the environment at a range of scales from local to global. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Modelling 
   
   
   
     This module demonstrates the range of techniques for computer-based models applied to the biological and environmental sciences using suitable important examples. You’ll have a two hour lecture and two hour computer practical each week to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plants and the Light Environment 
   
   
   
     This module provides a wide-ranging, detailed and modern training extending from the cellular to community level, for those with interest in plant physiology, environmental biology, agronomy and horticulture. The module focuses on the influence of the light environment on the physiology of native and crop species. It considers how this knowledge contributes to an understanding of the causes of variations in crop yields and may be used to assist in the search for improved varieties and increased productivity in agricultural systems. You’ll spend around four hours per week in lectures studying for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Bioethics 2: Sustainable Food Production, Biotechnology and the Environment 
   
   
   
     You’ll be given a sound understanding of widely accepted ethical principles and encourage the application of these insights to the analysis of contemporary issues in the agricultural, food and environmental sciences. You’ll have two hour lecture and two hour seminar each week to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Soil and Water Pollution and Reclamation  
   
   
   
     In this module, you’ll study improvement and continued management of intractable or contaminated terrestrial and aquatic environments. The focus is on both the scientific understanding of environmental problems and on the intervention strategies currently available. You’ll spend nine hours per week in lectures studying for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Computer Modelling in Science: Mini-Project 
   
   
   
     The module provides advanced training on the practical application of modelling methods to a case study exercise from the biological or environmental sciences. This requires you to develop, analyse, test and apply a model using provided data sets and information. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Geobiology 
   
   
   
     Geobiology explores the relationship between life and the Earth's physical and chemical environment over geological/ evolutionary time. The module will focus on the geological consequences of evolution and how life has influenced physical and chemical environment. Topics covered will include: origins and evolution of life; evolution of the atmosphere and biosphere; geobiology of critical intervals and palaeobiology and evolutionary ecology. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Environmental Physiology 
   
   
   
     Thousands of different man-made chemicals enter the environment and some are highly persistent and/or toxic. You’ll consider how organisms respond to pollution and other external stresses in general, and to different classes of toxic chemicals in particular. Several of these responses can be utilised as biomarkers, giving advance warning of possible ecological damage. The molecular actions of several pesticides are outlined, as are the mechanisms through which pesticide resistance can appear in pest populations. Finally, you’ll consider the roles of semiochemicals in signalling between pests, predators and potential food species, illustrating how these can be exploited for the purposes of eco-friendly pest management. You'll have a 3 hour lecture once per week and a 3 hour practical once per week to study for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Microbiology 
   
   
   
     This module will provide you with a sound understanding of microbial ecology, the role of microbes in natural processes and their application in waste water treatment and bioremediation processes. You’ll have a three hour lecture each week to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plants and the Soil Environment 
   
   
   
     Through a weekly three hour lecture, this module provides a detailed study into below-ground biological processes which influence the uptake of water and nutrients by plants. The module considers the acquisition of water and nutrients by plants in both agricultural and natural systems, and how plants interact with the soil environment. Consideration is given to using this knowledge to improve crop productivity and resource management and to understanding how resource capture by plant roots has influenced plant evolution over wider timescales. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Statistics and Experimental Design for Bioscientists 
   
   
   
     This module should give you an overall grasp of the major analytical techniques available, and how they relate to each other, as well as develop your abilities in experimental design, data analysis using appropriate software and presentation of results. You’ll have a three hour lecture each week to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    MSci Research Project in Environmental Science 
   
   
   
     This module will train you in the planning, execution and reporting of an independent advanced level research project. The module will help develop the skills associated with: planning, recording and executing an individual research project; presenting research both orally and visually to an audience of peers; writing scientific papers; effective time management and assimilating new research skills associated with a specific project. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Writing and Reviewing Research Proposals  
   
   
   
     The module aims to develop your skills in analysis and writing of research proposals. Specific areas covered include: communicating with awarding bodies (how to develop a research idea and write a grant application) and peer review of research proposals. You’ll spend around four hours per week in lectures studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Scientific Research Methods 
   
   
   
     You will research the theory of scientific method using a range of resources including library, web-based and published literature. Lectures on project planning and management theory and lay writing style will be given. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Syndicate Exercise: MSc Law and Environmental Science & MSci Environmental Science 
   
   
   
     This module covers the preparation of a group presentation and individual report on an environmental subject. You’ll have a one hour lecture and three hour practical each week to study for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
      
   There are no optional modules studied this year.