Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but offers a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   
    Producing Film and Television  
   
   
    This module engages with the narrative histories of film and television, from their origins to the present day, a period involving many significant transitional moments in production histories. The module looks at the coming of sound, the rise and demise of the Hollywood studio system, and the emergence of the network system. It asks what transition means at different historical moments by raising questions such as: What are the industries producing at these moments and why? How are the industries doing this? How are cultural products marketed and distributed? The module introduces historical method and the idea of historiography. It uses specific case examples and materials to examine the kinds of evidence used by film and television historians and the particular forms of knowledge produced.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Consuming Film and Television  
   
   
    This module asks questions surrounding the consumption—viewing and listening, in public and private environments including theatres, homes and more—of film, television and other screen media. It addresses different viewing contexts, including public spaces such as cinemas, private spaces such as homes, and emerging hybrid spaces. It also addresses international variations among viewing environments and experiences, along with censorship and other regulatory practices that relate to media consumption. To understand not only consumption environments but also media users, the module also investigates screen audiences, through historical as well as contemporary cases. Students completing the module gain an understanding of how screen media texts work as components of experiences dependent on consumption environments and on audiences’ attitudes, cultural backgrounds and other activities.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Reading Film and Television  
   
   
    This module introduces students to formal aspects of screen narratives and the language of textual analysis, which will enable you to describe and ‘read’ film and television texts. It also sheds light on the people who work on the production of film/TV texts and some of the key features of their collaboration.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Studying Film and Television  
   
   
    This module supports first-year students as you make the transition into degree-level work. Students gain skills in independent and collaborative learning with the aid of both guided and self-directed learning tasks. The module focus specifically on developing the academic skills required for film and television research.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   
   Transnational Media 
   
   
    You’ll learn about the concepts of ‘transnational’ and ‘postnational’ media, taking into account the movement and interactions of people, finance, technology and ideas around the world. You’ll develop a foundation of theoretical knowledge to be applied to case studies in global media to assist your understanding of the subject, spending four and a half hours in lectures, seminars and workshops each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Understanding Cultural Industries 
   
   
    You’ll learn how show business is broken down into ‘show’ and ‘business’ in film and television industries and examine how technology and legislation influence those industries. You’ll also learn about how advertising and market research influence the design and production of media in certain regions and how film and television have changed in different contexts and periods. Around five hours a week will be spent in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Film and Television in Social and Cultural Context 
   
   
    During this year-long module you’ll think about industries, audiences and surrounding debates from a social and cultural viewpoint. You’ll learn about the way that social and cultural meaning is produced by film and television programmes.  You’ll also explore the social practices that surround the consumption of media, such as movie going and television viewing. Around five hours a week will be spent in workshops and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Interrogating Practice 
   
   
    Throughout this module, you’ll build on your awareness of film and television as cultural products and discover new ways to do historical research into screen practice. You’ll begin to see film and television as cultural artefacts and focus on the production, circulation and consumption of film and television around the world, spending around five hours a week in workshops.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Researching Culture, Film and Media 
   
  
     For this year-long core module you’ll spend two hours a week in lectures and workshops to become familiar with different methods for investigating research topics and determining their suitability for different projects. You’ll learn the interdisciplinary nature of film, television and media studies and demonstrate this knowledge by choosing your own research project and methods. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
  
    Film and Television Studies Dissertation 
   
   
    You will carry out a major individual research project based on issues and concepts taught on the course so far. Your work will demonstrate your skill for critical argument and understanding on the topic and will be supported by individual supervision, resources such as film databases, and workshops on research methods throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Film and Television Genres 1 
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to the key concepts and theoretical work on specific film genres. Each year, the module investigates a particular genre or cycle such as action cinema, television drama, film noir and more.  Combined with what you have learnt on previous modules you will look at genre in the context of production and consumption, spending around five hours a week in workshops and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Blockbuster 
   
   
    You’ll examine a number of films to answer the question ‘what is a blockbuster?’ and explore the phenomenon by learning where the term came from and to what kind of films it has been applied worldwide. The social value of the term will also be considered, and you’ll discuss the global dynamics of the blockbuster. You will spend six hours a week in workshops and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Screen Encounters: Audiences and Engagement 
   
   
    Through four hours a week studying in workshops and seminars, you’ll gain an in-depth understanding of film and television audiences and why they watch media, taking into account the social, political and historical factors that shape audience experiences. You’ll also explore the role of marketing systems used to engage specific audiences and how this knowledge is applied in industry market research.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Video Production Project 
   
   
    This module combines the historical and theoretical knowledge you have gained with the practical task of video production. You’ll investigate the ways that production can alter the end product through recording and editing techniques, and experience the many decisions that must be made through the production process. You’ll spend time in media labs and in the field making a collaborative video production, alongside four hours a week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The New Hollywood 
   
   
    You’ll learn about key changes in Hollywood since the 1960s and develop critical thinking about the status and meaning of the ‘New Hollywood’ through comparisons with the so-called ‘Old Hollywood’ and ‘New New Hollywood’, attention to audience demographics, and study of evolving cinema going practices and cultural representations. You’ll also consider industry marketing materials and film-review media to further your engagement with the subject, spending around four hours a week in seminars and workshops.