Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   
   Compulsory  
  
    Business Finance
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to the fundamental concepts of finance and in particular: understanding the relationship between the risk of an investment and the expected returns, the concept of the time value of money and be able to calculate the present value of a single and multiple future cash flows. You will study this module through 11 two-hour weekly lectures and three one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Management Accounting and Decisions I
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to topics including: cost concepts and allocation of manufacturing overheads, absorption and variable costing, cost-volume-profit analysis, relevant costing and budgeting. You will have five two-hour lectures, four two-hour workshops, one two-hour guest speaker lecture, one one-hour tutorial and one one-hour revision lecture.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Methods 1b
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll study key mathematical and statistical techniques and their application to problems and data including: economic application of calculus; confidence intervals; introduction to hypothesis testing; partial differentiation, optimisation of two variables, probability, random variables and sampling distributions. Over the course of this module you will have 10 two-hour lectures and eight workshops.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Microeconomics for Business A
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to the microeconomic theory of the market and the firm. Topics covered include: market demand, supply and equilibrium, firm production and costs, market structure, perfect competition, monopolistic competition, oligopoly and monopoly. For this module you will have 10 two-hour lectures and three one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Computers in Business
    
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the use of computers and IT in business today - and in particular spreadsheet modelling - via a lab based assessment, case study group report and presentation. You will have 17 one-hour lectures; four one-hour computer lab sessions; 1 one-hour presentation tutorial and one 15 minute project review meeting. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Microeconomics for Business B1
    
   
   
    This module aims to develop your understanding of important economic concepts, including: exchange and trade, consumer theory, factor markets and welfare economics. You will have 10 two-hour lectures and three one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Business Law A
    
   
   
    In this module you will study topics such as: UK legal framework, impact of EU legislation, law of contract (essential elements, performance and remedies), business and the Law of Tort, employment law and law in a local and global context. You will have 10 two-hour lectures and four one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Accounting
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the nature and purpose of Financial Accounting and study key accounting concepts including: the impact of accounting policy selection, accounting standards and the recording and collating of accounting information. Accounting reports e.g. income statements, balance sheets and cash flow statements will be developed from accounting data and you’ll gain an understanding of some contemporary accounting issues. You will have 20 one-hour lectures and 3 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Business Law B
    
   
   
    This module will improve your understanding of law in a business context by building upon the foundation provided in the module ‘Business Law A’. You will have 10 weekly two-hour lectures and 4 one-hour seminars (once a fortnight).
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Organisational Behaviour 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the basic ideas of organisational behaviour. The content will encourage you to develop an understanding of managing and developing people within business organisations. The module will draw its primary material from the major theorists and theories of both organisational psychology and organisational behaviour. The module will also develop links with other aspects of the business school curriculum such as general management and international business. You will have 11 two-hour lectures and a one hour tutorial across the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Entrepreneurship and Business
    
   
   
    This module presents a formal analysis of entrepreneurship in theory and practice leading on to a consideration of creativity and business concept generation.  You will have 11 two-hour lectures with the module concluding with the practical application of these theories and concepts in a business planning and business concept presentation.
      
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
   
   East Asian Business in the Twentieth Century 
   
   
    In view of the recent impact East Asian business systems have had on world business and trading patterns, it is essential to understand how they evolved. This module is aimed at providing the historical background of Japan, the rise of the 'Tiger Economies' and China's vibrant development. You will have 10 two-hour lectures and one two-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Insurance in a Risky World 
   
   
    This module provides you with an introduction to the demand for and supply of insurance. The module examines how insurance markets operate to satisfy commercial and individual customers' demand for protection against risk, and would usually include topics such as private and social insurance, the historical development of insurance, the supply of insurance, Lloyd's and the London Insurance Market, how insurance is distributed to consumers, the role of insurance in the economy, international aspects of insurance and insurance and catastrophes.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Business Operations 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the scope and importance of operations management in both service and manufacturing businesses. The content of the module will be explored using a variety of management games and includes how IT and knowledge management is used to support operations, strategies for success in manufacturing operations, planning and forecasting, infrastructure development, how to gain competitive advantage through the effective management of the supply chain, the virtual enterprise, and achieving, managing and measuring quality. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Origins and Development of the UK Economy 
   
   
    The module provides an analysis of a range of themes, issues and episodes which have shaped the development of the UK economy since the commercial revolution. Among the topics addressed are: the changing balance in activity across industries and sectors, the evolving characteristics of UK industry and commerce, changing patterns of trade, the role of individuals, the government and business organisation in the economy and the relationship between the UK and the imperial and global economy. You will have six two-hour lectures, five one-hour lectures, and five one-hour seminars.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Methods 1a
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to the mathematical prerequisites for the understanding of the quantitative components of economics and business. You will have one two-hour lecture per week for 10 weeks and eight one-hour workshops (one per week).
      
   
  
      
   
   
   Studying Organisations
    
   
   
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Tourism Futures: the Challenge of Sustainability
    
   
   
    This module interweaves the various disciplines of tourism studies, to provide an understanding of how tourism fits into what may be described as postmodern society. It also explores the historical origins of the tourism industry, assesses the role of tour operators, as well as the internet and other media in providing postmodern tourist experience. The module analyses the challenge of sustainable transport options, trends in tour operation management, sustainable transport practice, niche markets like eco-tourism, and investigate and evaluate the various social, cultural and environmental impacts which the tourist industry has on destinations.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Introductory Econometrics
    
   
   
    This module will provide an introduction to the theory and practice of quantitative economic modelling at a basic level. The theoretical framework will be developed around the classical regression model and its extensions, with theoretical understanding being supplemented with computer-based practical examples of modelling and data analysis. You will have two one-hour lectures for nine weeks or examples classes per week and five one-hour formative computer lab tests.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Reporting
    
   
   
    This module will pay particular attention to the application of financial reporting principles by listed companies and the impact of International Financial Reporting Standards. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars to study for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Database Design and Implementation
    
   
   
    This module examines the process of relational database design and implementation using relevant theory. Applications of modern databases will be studied and all students will be required to create a database system, fully documented, to solve a given problem. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour hands-on teaching on database skills.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Accounting Information Systems
    
   
   
    This module looks at the use of accounting information systems in financial and management accounting and their control and audit. You’ll cover topics such as: introduction to systems, business processes, budgeting and decision support systems, internal control and audit, computer crime and external audit and enterprise resource planning systems. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and four two-hour lab sessions. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Computational Finance
    
   
   
    Stressing the fundamentals of finance, this module provides you with a knowledge and understanding of the key finance subjects such as money market, return metric, portfolio models and asset pricing models. It equips you with the essential techniques applied in financial calculations through 11 two-hour lectures and five one-hour computer lab workshops.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Macroeconomics for Business
    
   
   
    This module allows you to explore the nature and scope of the macroeconomic policy agenda, and develops the analytical frameworks necessary for the evaluation of policy instruments. The module enables you to understand the economic arguments that under-lie different views and to evaluate relevant arguments.  You’ll have nine two-hour lectures, one one-hour lecture, and three one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Management
    
   
   
    The module will introduce you to corporate investment and financing decision as well as study the interaction between them. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars to cover material in this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Methods 2A
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll study further maths and statistics including topics such as linear algebra, constrained optimisation, difference equations and hypothesis testing. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and eight one-hour workshops.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Management Strategy
    
   
   
    This module provides you with a theoretical and applied overview of strategic management in today's operational environment. It introduces and analyses the key concepts, frameworks and techniques of strategic management, which allow you to diagnose complex situations related to real-world business development. For study of this module you will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Management Accounting and Decisions II
    
   
   
    This module introduces the following topics: activity based costing, process costing, transfer pricing and the changing role of the management accountant. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars. 
      
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Economics of Pricing and Decision Making
    
   
   
    This module presents an introduction to economic decision making with a focus on the firm's pricing decisions and mechanisms, including: monopoly pricing; oligopoly pricing (non-co-operative and collusive); auctions and pricing under uncertainty. Over the course of the module you will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing Strategy
    
   
   
    This module focuses on the strategic dimension of marketing with reference to the ways in which organisations compete with different product-market offers. There is an emphasis on the processes involved in the development of a marketing strategy and the ways in which such strategies evolve. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Innovation
    
   
   
    In this module, you will cover topics including: innovation in the history of economic thought, basic concepts in the economics of innovation, Intellectual property, economics of networks, standards and dominant designs, the entrepreneur, innovation, demand and consumption,  clusters, innovation and the division of labour, innovation, competitiveness and trade, policy for innovation. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour tutorials. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Technology and Organization
    
   
   
    This module will examine a number of technologies, including cloud computing, 3D printing, nanotechnology, genetic modification, synthetic biology, artificial intelligence, robotics, genetic medicine and bioprinting, in the context of wider sustainability issues. You will also explore the broader themes of convergence, technological determinism, transhumanism and the Singularity. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures plus two one-hour seminars, one 10 minute video and seven podcasts.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Risk Management Decisions 
   
   
    This module will allow you to understand the negative impact of risk on the stakeholders (including individuals, employees, corporate decision takers, and shareholders) of a modern organisation and to understand the risk-creation process in an organisation. You will analyse the nature of value-creating risk management decisions and the module will introduce you to the different aspects of corporate risk and examine how the risk of fortuitous loss may affect the various stakeholders in the operations of firms.  
   
  
      
   
   
   International Firms 
   
   
    In this module, you will examine the international business environment; in particular the impact of international firms on the economy, the determinants of Foreign Direct Investment and their significance on regional and global economic integration. Attention is paid to cultural and organisational aspects of international business and their impact on Corporate Social Responsibility, as well as differences in corporate governance across economic areas. The structure of the module is based on three sections focusing mainly on the activities of MNEs, firm organisation and performance, and the impact of international firms on the economy. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Corporate Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management 
   
   
    This module develops an understanding of corporate entrepreneurship (CE) and an appreciation of how larger firms can be designed to be more entrepreneurial, flexible and innovative. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Financial Analysis
    
   
   
    This module uses a combination of lectures and group work to develop your understanding of financial reporting, the links between strategic and financial management, and the ways in which the stock market responds to financial information. The module involves detailed study and critical analysis of the financial strategy and performance of a major UK quoted company. Over the duration of the module you will have 11 one-hour lectures and two two-hour workshops.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Markets
    
   
   
    This module examines the workings of the major financial markets and looks at the way in which the prices of financial instruments are calculated. You’ll cover the key theoretical models of modern finance, capital asset pricing model, arbitrage pricing model and financial risk management with derivative instruments. Markets for equity and debt are dealt with, as are markets for derivative instruments. You will have 10 two-hour lectures and two one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Corporate Finance
    
   
   
    This module will develop your knowledge of financial decision-making and strategic financial decisions, including takeovers and mergers. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and two two-hour seminars per semester.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Management Accounting and Decisions III
    
   
   
    You’ll be given a critical review of strategic management accounting techniques and new forms of performance management including: the potential for accounting information to be used as a strategic tool and the range of alternative approaches to performance management and their respective merits/problems. You’ll have 11 one-hour lectures and three one-hour seminars to study for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Auditing, Governance and Scandals
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll develop an understanding of alternative perspectives on the role of external audit, audit theory and practice and the role of judgement in audit. The module also includes a critical review of corporate scandals and the associated failures in corporate governance systems/procedures. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and three one-hour seminars to cover material in this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Financial Reporting
    
   
   
    You’ll study topics such as: accounting conceptual framework, accounting measurement and recognition issues. Teaching will be delivered through 11 one-hour lectures and two two-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Management Accounting and Decisions IV
    
   
   
    You’ll develop your understanding of the aims and objectives of management accounting and more advanced issues in management accounting, including scholarly research into the same. Teaching will be delivered through 11 one-hour lectures and two two-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Business Ethics
    
   
   
    This module explores business-society relations through the theories and practices of business ethics and social responsibility (BE&SR). The first part of the module will address the concept of business ethics, a discussion of citizenship theory and the challenges of globalisation and sustainability. The second part of the module will address the issues, impacts of business on individual stakeholder groups and analyse BE and SR in relation to each group. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and four one-hour seminars to cover material for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Risk, Information and Insurance
    
   
   
    You’ll examine individual decision-making under conditions of risk and uncertainty, and investigate the effectiveness of insurance as a means of controlling risk. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and two two-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Econometrics
    
   
   
    The module will provide an introduction to econometric techniques for modelling data. Topics to be covered include panel data modelling, qualitative response models and time series models. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and four one-hour small group computer workshops.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    International Finance
    
   
   
    This module discusses and analyses the management of the international finance function of firms. Typical issues include: foreign exchange markets, foreign exchange and other international risks, international financial markets, international investment decisions and foreign trade. You will have 11 one-hour weekly lectures and four one-hour seminars at regular intervals during the module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Law and Economics
    
   
   
    This module provides an insight into the law and legal processes which have arisen from the application of economic analysis, as well as exploring the applications from the law of tort, contract and commercial law. Teaching will take place through 11 one-hour lectures and two two-hour tutorials for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Logistics and Supply Chain Management
    
   
   
    The module provides an introduction to logistics and supply chain management (LSCM) within the international context. As such, the module examines how LSCM strategies contribute to businesses' competitive advantage, the relationship aspects between business partners in delighting end-customers, and supporting operational activities and the international transport of goods. The module is taught by reference to academic literature and management practice, including case-studies and application to special topics such as humanitarian logistics and international trade. You will have 11 two-hour lectures and two one-hour seminars to study material for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Corporate Restructuring and Governance
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the analysis of different forms of corporate restructuring, focusing on the internal and external factors influencing restructuring as well as the effects of restructuring on a variety of firm level outcomes. You will have a 11 one-hour lectures and 2 two-hour tutorials.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Regulation 
   
  
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing and Society 
   
   
    This module will give you an overview of marketing and its impact on society. It will consider marketing and socially-responsible consumption, marketing and public policy issues in advertising, promotion, pricing and distribution, marketing and consumer protection policy, and consumer response to product information and disclosure.