Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    The Biosciences and Global Food Security 
   
   
   
     How can you use science to help improve global food security? This module introduces you to the issues of global food security and the complexity existing in different parts of our food generation system. Looking across the food supply chain, you’ll cover the evolution of crops, crop and animal production, and the food industry. Importantly, you’ll also look at sustainable nutrition because food security isn’t just about supply – it’s important that people are getting the right kind of food. You’ll learn about these issues through a mix of lectures and practical laboratory sessions. You’ll also develop professional skills to work safely in laboratory situations.   
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemistry – The Building Blocks of Life 
   
   
   
     Have you ever wondered how some crops can resist diseases? This module provides you with the fundamentals for understanding biochemical processes in living organisms. You’ll be introduced to the basic structure, properties and functions of the four key biological macromolecules: nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates and lipids. You’ll also look at the metabolic pathways occurring in cells, such as respiration, photosynthesis and the biosynthetic pathways for the key macromolecules. In addition to lectures, you’ll have practical laboratory sessions to learn how to use key biochemical techniques for the separation and analysis of macromolecules and measurement of the metabolic process. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Foundation Science  
   
   
   
     A solid understanding of mathematics, physics and chemistry is essential for a scientist. This module will provide you with the foundation knowledge of mathematics and statistics, physics and chemistry needed for your future studies. It compensates for potential gaps in understanding resulting from different prior education. The mathematics and statistics element includes powers and logs, differentiation, significance and regression. The physics element includes energy and heat, light and the electromagnetic spectrum, attenuation/absorption, and radioactivity. The chemistry element includes elements and periodic table; atomic structure and bonding; intermolecular attractions, chemical equilibrium; acids and bases, oxidation and reduction; rates of reaction; and basic organic chemistry, isomerism, and rings. You’ll have lectures from experts in these fields and use computer-aided learning practicals to apply what you’ve learnt.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Nutrition 
   
   
   
     Nutrients are vital to humans and animals, but how do they work? In this module you’ll be given a comprehensive introduction to the key concepts in the field of nutrition, including macronutrients, energy metabolism, vitamins and minerals. Depending on your interest, you’ll be able to focus on human or animal nutrition. This means you can choose to look at the role of nutrition in human disease (including coronary heart disease, cancer, obesity and diabetes), or learn about animal nutrition and what it means for food production. You’ll learn about nutrition through a mix of lectures, practical sessions and e-learning.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Academic Development and Employability 
   
   
   
     This module aims to enhance your academic and professional development via small group work within tutor groups. You’ll become equipped in areas such as essay-writing, presentational skills (oral and written), critical interpretation of published materials, and other generic skills that should benefit you in other modules throughout your degree. You’ll have a one hour lecture and 45 minute tutorial each week to study for this module. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Food Materials and Ingredients 
   
   
   
     Food materials can be raw, or in the form of manufactured food products. During processing, the material properties of the food are altered; this directly affects the quality of the food product in terms of, for example, its colour, flavour and texture. This module introduces you to properties of these materials (raw and processed), with a particular focus on the chemical and physical nature of carbohydrates, proteins and lipids. You’ll have a weekly four hour lecture supported by three hours of practicals each week.
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary Agricultural Systems  
   
   
   
     Modern agriculture is a dynamic, fast-paced and high-tech industry. In this module, you’ll explore practical agricultural systems used by commercial UK farms. Designed for students with a farm or non-farming background, you’ll get to understand the fundamental concepts of agricultural systems within the context of contemporary markets, policy and research. Exact topics covered in the module will vary according to the issues affecting the agricultural industry in any one year, but examples include: dairy production, arable production, soils, agri-environmental interactions, labour and machinery management and farm business systems. You’ll have lectures from academics currently researching these fields and will visit the University Farm and external farms to see what you’ve learnt in practice.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Microbial Physiology 
   
   
   
     Through four hours of lectures each week, you’ll be given basic knowledge of bacterial cell structures and growth and reveal the mechanisms that allow bacteria to respond to their environment. You’ll also be taught how to handle data commonly used in microbiological experimentation and be given training in the basic practical methods required for all microbiological laboratory work through a three hour practical each week. 
    
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional modules - there are no optional modules in year one  
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Manufacture of Food 
   
   
   
     In this module you will learn about the manufacturing of a wide range of industrially manufactured food products. You will follow the whole process from the ingredients used to the final packaged food, with an emphasis on key physical and chemical properties of food biomaterials before, during and after processing, and on the underpinning scientific principles that can be applied to a number of food manufacturing systems. You will have lectures, tutorials, group learning and practical sessions in our Food Processing Facility as well as in the laboratory. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Food Product Case Studies 
   
   
   
     Through problem-based learning (PBL) you will develop skills in diagnosing and solving challenges relating to the manufacture, distribution and/or storage of food products. You’ll have a three hour session each week to study for this module.
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Food Safety and Legislation  
   
   
   
     Through weekly lectures and workshops, the aim of this module is to introduce you to the legislation relating to food and enable you to recognise the responsibilities (and liabilities) of those engaged in the production, manufacture and supply of food and related products. This includes the composition, labelling and advertising of food and food products sold for human consumption within the UK and the EU as well as the legislation that impacts on health attributes and claims for consumer products. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Sensory Evaluation 
   
   
   
     Sensory quality of food is the key attribute in food acceptability. It provides pleasure and also plays a key role in delivering nutritious food in a palatable way. Food quality can be measured using sensory methods as well as instrumental measures of attributes like taste, aroma and texture. The aim of this module is to review the senses and the sensory methods employed by research and industry to measure sensory properties and the consumers’ liking response. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Microbial Mechanisms of Foodborne Diseases  
   
  
    This module aims to provide a fundamental understanding of the microorganisms causing food-borne disease and the mechanisms by which they do this and their routes of transmission. In laboratory practicals you will learn a number of core practical methods needed for the safe handling, culture, isolation, enumeration and identification of a range of ACDP2 pathogens.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Principles of Immunology 
   
   
   
     What are the main events of the immune response when the body is infected by intra and extracellular parasites, essential components of many diseases? In this module you’ll be introduced to the fundamental concepts behind cellular and molecular immunology. You’ll learn about the main characteristics and features of the innate and adaptive immune system, their functions and how they relate to each other. You’ll explore current immune-techniques, modern concepts of immune-deficiency and hypersensitivities, and contemporary topics in animal and human diseases.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Virology 
   
   
   
     The module will provide an introduction to viruses and their interactions with their hosts (bacteria, plants and animals including humans) as well as discussing the structure of viruses and their significance including pathogenesis and molecular biology. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures studying for this module. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Business Operations 
   
   
   
     You’ll be given appreciation of the main elements and techniques of operations management, within a business context through a weekly 90 minute lecture and one hour seminar. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Nutrition Regulation, Physiology and Endocrinology 
   
   
   
     This module aims to develop your understanding of the principles of nutrition from dietary assessment and food analysis through to how the body utilises the diet’s nutrients in energetics throughout the human lifespan and in different pathological states. You will investigate the physiological systems that control homeostasis and metabolism as well as examining how the body regulates various physiological responses to food, regulating appetite and energy expenditure. You will have two lectures and workshops per week for this module.  
    
   
  
      
   
      
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    This module will provide you with an opportunity to use your initiative and knowledge to undertake an original research project under the supervision of an individual member of academic staff. Your research project will run throughout the final year. This project encourages critical thinking and involves independent research in a supportive environment under the supervision of an individual member of academic staff.  
    You will design the study, gain familiarity with the techniques, undertake data collection, debate ethical issues and where appropriate safety procedures relevant to the topic. You’ll undertake appropriate quantitative analysis and prepare a report of approximately 5000 words.  
    Recent research projects include:    include:  
    
     Waste tomato seed as a source of tocopherol (vitamin E)-rich natural emulsions  
     Comparison between Turkish Delight and hard gummy sweets  
     Particle stabilised emulsions   
     Flavour perception of standard and organic orange juice  
    
    Read BURN the Biosciences Undergraduate Research at Nottingham web pages to find out more about undergraduate research projects. BURN is a freely accessible e-journal which showcases final-year research projects undertaken by biosciences students.   
   
  
      
   
  
    The Microflora of Foods 
   
   
   
     You’ll be given an understanding of: the micro-organisms which are important in foods; the factors which control the development of the microflora of food products and the methods which can be used to isolate and identify bacteria from food products. You’ll spend one day per week in lectures studying for this module. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Personal and Professional Development for Food Scientists 
   
   
   
     This module provides specific training and learning opportunities to develop a range of key skills and competencies that improve employability prospects for you, and your performance once in work. These include, positive behaviours e.g. taking responsibility, being proactive, and integrity on discharging roles as well as key employability skills e.g working as part of a team, developing leadership capability, exercising influence, networking. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Food Factory Operations 
   
   
   
     You’ll be made aware of a range of operations used in food manufacturing and emphasis will be placed on the hygienic and legal requirements for the production of foods. When working in a food factory, you should have sufficient understanding to contribute, at managerial level, to a production team and be able to contribute to the development of novel food products under factory time scales and limitations. You’ll have a four hour lecture and four hour practical each week to study for this module. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Trends in Food Research 
   
   
   
     This module will expose you to research and developments in a number of areas of current academic interest within the Division of Food Sciences. This could include: flavour and sensory science; properties of biopolymers; sustainable nutrition; salt reduction; engineering new food structures. Factors that initiate shape and direct this research will be discussed and explored. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Applied Bioethics 1: Animals, Biotechnology and Society  
   
   
   
     Animal-human interactions raise some prominent ethical issues. In this module, you’ll examine the ethical dimensions concerning animal agriculture, modern biotechnologies and research in the biosciences, in relation to both humans and non-human species. You’ll learn about the ethical frameworks used to analyse specific dilemmas raised by the human use of animals. Using specific animal and biotechnology case studies, you’ll interpret the main ethical theories and principles and apply them to the case studies to inform professional decision-making. You’ll have a mix of lectures and seminars to explore these concepts.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Physical Chemistry of Molecules 
   
   
   
     This module will develop your understanding of the basic physical chemistry behind the properties of biomolecules - properties which underpin their behaviour in vivo and their technology and some of the techniques used to characterise their size. You’ll spend six hours in lectures and have a four hour practical each week to study for this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Exploring Perspectives in Entrepreneurship 
   
   
   
     This module aims to develop a comprehensive understanding of the concept of entrepreneurship and what entrepreneurial activity involves in practice. It introduces theoretical perspectives like economic theories, sociological approaches, and psychological approaches. You’ll understand what shapes the practice of entrepreneurship in different settings (eg social entrepreneurship or family business) and what is due to contextual influences (eg entrepreneurship in the media and the influence of gender). There are eleven one-hour lectures and three seminars. 
    
   
        
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Technology Entrepreneurship in Business  
   
   
   
     This module introduces the process of commercialising for science and technology. Commercialisation deals with developing intellectual property within the science and technology domain to a point where it is ready to enter the market. This process is an increasingly important activity as Government and business places importance on the wealth creation. You’ll have weekly lectures and two seminars. 
    
   
       
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Bioethics 2: Sustainable Food Production, Biotechnology and the Environment 
   
   
   
     Building on Applied Bioethics 1, you’ll investigate widely accepted ethical principles and apply your insights to contemporary ethical issues in agricultural, food and environmental sciences. You’ll explore the ethical dimensions of prominent issues raised by the agricultural practices (including the use of biotechnology and GM crops) designed to meet the nutritional needs of the global population. You’ll also learn about how ethical theory can inform professional choices and public policies related to food production and environmental management. You’ll have a mix of lectures, tutorials and team-based exercises to develop a sound understanding of ethical principles. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Rapid Methods in Microbial analysis 
   
   
   
     This module will enable you to understand where new methods can replace traditional techniques of microbial detection and recording. You’ll spend four hours in lectures and have a three hour practical each week to study for this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     Microbial Fermentation 
    
   
   
   
     This module commences with a review of microbial fermentation, including beer, cheese, yoghurt, meat and single-cell protein production, as well as sewage treatment. The underlying principles of microbial fermentation will be discussed, in addition to specific examples which will be examined in depth. From this basic knowledge the problems of microbial contamination and spoilage of the finished product will be analysed. You’ll spend four hours in lectures and have a four hour practical each week to study for this module.