Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
  Typical Year One Modules (post A-level route) 
  
  
  
    French 1 - core 
   
   
   
     You’ll develop your understanding of the French language including grammar, written expression, aural and oral skills. 3 hours per week will be spent in lectures, workshops, and oral classes with a native speaker studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to French and Francophone Studies - core 
   
  
    This module will provide an introduction to the range of topics and study skills students will need and further develop in the course of their degree study of French and Francophone Studies. It will cover the main fields of the discipline, including linguistics, politics, history, thought, French and Francophone literature, media, visual culture and cinema. The module will be taught through a combination of lectures and workshops. 
   
  
      
   
  
    France: History and Identity 
   
  
    The module aims to introduce students to the course of French history since the late Middle Ages through the study of a series of historical figures, their times and lives, how their 'stories' are written and woven into the fabric of 'le roman de la nation' (the national story) and how they have been appropriated to serve a range of different ends. It will also introduce students to the iconography and visual manifestations of the French historical landscape. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to French Literature: Landmarks in Narrative 
   
  
    This module aims to introduce students to the critical study of French narrative, covering key examples of novels from the eighteenth century to the present. In studying each text we will focus on (a) understanding the text within its historical context, and (b) developing critical approaches to the text. The module will develop students' key skills in literary study, from the basics of understanding a text with unfamiliar syntax and vocabulary, to close reading and the application of complex literary theories. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary France 
   
  
    This module will focus on a selection of themes: French political institutions, with particular emphasis on the presidency; political parties in France; immigration and identity, including questions of identity in contemporary French culture. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to French Literature: Representations of Paris 
   
  
    This module aims to introduce students to the comparative study of literature and culture, inviting students to consider how Paris is represented in a range of texts (poetic, narrative and filmic) in the modern period (post-1800). Students will learn reading techniques adapted to different genres and media, and to consider representations of the city within their broader social, historical and critical contexts. 
   
  
      
   
   Plus either  
  
    Communication and Culture 
   
   
   
     This module familiarises you with the interdisciplinary fields of communications theory and cultural studies, whilst encouraging you to discriminate between particular theoretical positions. You’ll analyse a range of communicative texts and cultural phenomena. Topics covered include advertising, PR, ideology, activism and intercultural communication. You’ll spend 3 hours in lectures & seminars each week.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Communication and Technology 
   
   
   
     Through this module you’ll examine the relationship between communication, the mass media, and technology: with a focus on the cultural impact of the internet, digital media and mobile phones. The module covers the use of these technologies in protest, their impact on news production, their everyday influence and the consequences of the ‘digital divide’. You’ll spend around 3 hours in lectures and seminars each week studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Or 
   
  
    Media and Society 
   
   
   
     This module will critically evaluate the central role that the media play in understanding contemporary society. With a particular focus on newspapers, television, film and the internet, you will be guided through a series of key debates around the development, composition and function of different kinds of media. As well as examining issues surrounding the social context of the media, the module examines how regulation, self-regulation or consumer sovereignty can ensure the most socially useful news media, and how audiences consume and use media. The module involves three hours of lectures and seminars per week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Cultures of Everyday Life 
   
   
   
     You’ll examine the notion of 'everyday life' as it comes into contact with a range of 19th, 20th and 21st century cultural theories and modes of representation. You’ll appreciate the dense, complex and contradictory nature of day to day experience and examine public consecrated representations of everyday life (e.g. soaps, dramas, museums and archives) with a view to unmasking their ideological effects.  You’ll spend around 3 hours each week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
     
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical Year One Modules (beginners' route) 
  
  
  
    French 1 (beginners') - core 
   
  
    The module focuses on the intensive study from beginners' level of the five key skills of listening, speaking, writing, reading, and grammatical competence. The module will use a set text book, but this will also be supplemented with other exercises and materials designed to work towards the specific requirements of a degree programme in French Studies, whereby students come into contact with modules in French literature, culture, history or linguistics. 
   
  
      
   
  
    France: History and Identity 
   
  
    The module aims to introduce students to the course of French history since the late Middle Ages through the study of a series of historical figures, their times and lives, how their 'stories' are written and woven into the fabric of 'le roman de la nation' (the national story) and how they have been appropriated to serve a range of different ends. It will also introduce students to the iconography and visual manifestations of the French historical landscape. 
   
  
      
   
  
    France: Twentieth-Century Texts in Translation 
   
  
    The module offers an introduction to aspects of French culture and society to be studied through a selection of literary texts studies in English translation. By choosing texts with varied thematic and formal features the module will give an insight into the range of themes and issues which have preoccupied writers in France. The module will also raise students' awareness of a range of literary styles and techniques and the ways in which these may influence the reader. 
   
  
      
   
   Plus Either  
  
    Communication and Culture 
   
  
    This module familiarises you with the interdisciplinary fields of communications theory and cultural studies, whilst encouraging you to discriminate between particular theoretical positions. You'll analyse a range of communicative texts and cultural phenomena. Topics covered include advertising, PR, ideology, activism and intercultural communication. You'll spend 3 hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Communication and Technology 
   
  
    Through this module you'll examine the relationship between communication, the mass media, and technology: with a focus on the cultural impact of the internet, digital media and mobile phones. The module covers the use of these technologies in protest, their impact on news production, their everyday influence and the consequences of the 'digital divide'. You'll spend around 3 hours in lectures and seminars each week studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   Or  
  
    Media and Society 
   
  
    This module will critically evaluate the central role that the media play in understanding contemporary society. With a particular focus on newspapers, television, film and the internet, you will be guided through a series of key debates around the development, composition and function of different kinds of media. As well as examining issues surrounding the social context of the media, the modules examines how regulation, self-regulation or consumer sovereignty can ensure the most socially useful news media, and how audiences consume and use media. The modules involves three hours of lectures and seminars per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cultures of Everyday Life 
   
  
    You'll examine the notion of 'everyday life' as it comes into contact with a range of 19th, 20th and 21st century cultural theories and modes of representation. You'll appreciate the dense, complex and contradictory nature of day to day experience and examine public consecrated representations of everyday life (e.g. soaps, dramas, museums and archives) with a view to unmasking their ideological effects. You'll spend around 3 hours each week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical Year Two Modules (post-A level route) 
  
  
  
    French 2 - core 
   
  
    Building upon the language module studied in Year 1, you'll further improve your skills in reading, listening, speaking, creative writing and translation. You'll spend 2 hours per week in workshops and in oral classes with a native speaker for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Sociolinguistics: an Introduction 
   
  
    This module provides an introduction to the field of Sociolinguistics through the examination of various approaches to contemporary Sociolinguists. It aims to explore the relationship between language and society through an examination of the social contexts of language use. French will be one of the languages upon which we will draw so as to understand how language behaves in different social contexts.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary France and Globalisation 
   
  
    This module looks at contemporary French society in the context of an increasingly globalised culture and economy. The module analyses recent attempts to defend, redefine and adapt key aspects of French economic and cultural life in order to negotiate ways of living in an era of globalisation. The material in the module focuses on key debates around globalisation: the national and the 'local' versus the global; constructions of Frenchness in opposition to America; the decline of rural France; the contemporary redefinition and possible continued significance of established French values and cultural practices; and the problems associated with maintaining a distinctively French social model in the face of globalisation.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Francophone Africa: Exploring Contemporary Issues 
   
  
    This module explores a range of political and social issues relevant to contemporary sub-Saharan Francophone Africa through literature, film and popular culture. It also offers an overview of the history of the French language in Africa and introduces students to the range of varieties of French spoken here today.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Post-War French Theatre 
   
  
    Examining the experimental theatre which flourished in France in the 1950s and 1960s, you'll consider authors such as Genet, Beckett and Ionesco. Focusing on dramatic technique, theory and performance, you'll spend around two hours per week studying in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    New Wave French Cinema 
   
  
    Introducing you to teaching in film analysis, you'll consider a particular period of French cinema through a detailed study of the New Wave. You'll spend between 2-3 hours a week in lectures and seminars for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Enlightenment Literature: An Introduction 
   
  
    This module is an introduction to the study of eighteenth-century French literature, through a variety of texts chosen to offer an acessible approach to the period's main literary genres and movements of thought.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Understanding Cultural Industries 
   
  
    Introducing you to the critical frameworks for understanding the dynamics and processes of the cultural industries, you'll become familiar with various topics such as: the nature of cultural industry production; specific industrial practices and relations; the construction of markets and audiences; the nature of media work; the influence of technologies and legal regimes on the creation and circulation of media property. During an average week you'll spend around 5 hours in lectures and an hour in seminars during study of this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Translating Cultures 
   
  
    This module introduces you to key concepts from inter-cultural communications theory. Using a range of examples and case-studies, you'll be able to apply comparative analyses that isolate cultural effects on communication. A balance is struck between the ideal of harmonious inter-cultural communication on the one hand, and the richness of cultural diversity on the other. You'll spend around 3 hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Transnational Media 
   
  
    Building on approaches to national cinema introduced in first-year film modules, you'll look at recent understandings of post-national and transnational media, and specifically consider the flows of people, media, technology, ideas, and finances among nations. In particular, you'll address global media interactions emerging from tensions between cultural homogenisation and heterogenisation. During an average week you'll have a one hour lecture, one hour seminar and a 2.5 hour workshop.  
   
  
      
   
                            
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical Year Two Modules (beginners' route) 
  
  
   
  
    French 2 (beginners) - core 
   
   
   
     Building upon the language module studied in Year 1, you’ll further improve your skills in reading, listening, speaking, creative writing and translation. You’ll spend 2 hours per week in workshops and in oral classes with a native speaker for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to French and Francophone Studies - core 
   
   
   
     This module will provide an introduction to the range of topics and study skills students will need and further develop in the course of their degree study of French and Francophone Studies. It will cover the main fields of the discipline, including linguistics, politics, history, thought, French and Francophone literature, media, visual culture and cinema. These topics will be covered in 4 thematic units over the course of the year and the material studied ranges from different types of text to images and film. The module will be taught through a combination of lectures and workshops.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Understanding Cultural Industries 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to the critical frameworks for understanding the dynamics and processes of the cultural industries, you’ll become familiar with various topics such as: the nature of cultural industry production; specific industrial practices and relations; the construction of markets and audiences; the nature of media work; the influence of technologies and legal regimes on the creation and circulation of media property. During an average week you’ll spend around 5 hours in lectures and an hour in seminars during study of this module.   
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Translating Cultures 
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to key concepts from inter-cultural communications theory. Using a range of examples and case-studies, you’ll be able to apply comparative analyses that isolate cultural effects on communication. A balance is struck between the ideal of harmonious inter-cultural communication on the one hand, and the richness of cultural diversity on the other. You’ll spend around 3 hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Transnational Media 
   
   
   
     Building on approaches to national cinema introduced in first-year film modules, you’ll look at recent understandings of post-national and trans-national media, and specifically consider the flows of people, media, technology, ideas, and finances among nations. In particular, you’ll address global media interactions emerging from tensions between cultural homogenisation and heterogenisation. During an average week you’ll have a one hour lecture, one hour seminar and a 2.5 hour workshop. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Year Three 
  
 
   This year will be spent in France or a Francophone country on a programme of studies in a higher education institution, as an assistant in a school or on a work placement. For more information, see the Department of French and Francophone Studies' Study Abroad 
  page.
   
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical Year Four Modules (post A-level and beginners' routes) 
  
  
  Compulsory
   
   
   
   French 3 - core 
   
   
   
     Building on the skills gained in Years 1 and 2, you’ll further develop your oral and written skills, translation into and out of French, creative writing in different registers, linguistic commentary and production of summaries, as well as perfecting your French grammar and vocabulary. In the course of this year-long module, you’ll spend 2 hours per week in language workshops and in oral classes with a native speaker. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Individual and Society 
   
   
   The module aims to explore the ways in which French social theory and fiction have thought through the changing nature of the individual and the self in society. In order to explore these shifts in subjectivity and selfhood in relation to wider societal transformations the module focuses primarily on the world of work as a defining mode of social organisation.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Contemporary Representations of Travel 
   
   
   From tourism to exploration, from exile to migration, from pilgrimage to business travel, we will question the tacit ideologies found in contemporary travel discourses. The importance of this field has been steadily growing in between disciplines that range from literary studies to ethnography. The module will use these cross-cultural influences to create an arena in which to develop connections between key disciplines and different forms of arts (literature, ethnography, films, photography). You will spend 2 hours a week in seminars for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
   French Documentary Cinema 
   
   
   This module introduces students to French documentary cinema, by examining the work of a range of filmmakers and exploring the theoretical, socio-cultural and ethical questions raised by documentary cinema.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Theories and Practices of Translation 
   
   
   You'll examine the history of translation and different translation models across a range of genres, including novel, drama, audiovisual media and poetry. For each theory, you'll examine a number of case studies, either French texts translated into English or English texts into French. Spending around 1.5 hours per week in lectures, you'll be encouraged to develop a critical and reflective approach to translation practice.  
   
  
      
   
   
   People and Propaganda 
   
   
   Studying various forms of artistic works taken from key moments in the French Revolutionary decade (1789 - 1799), you'll consider the reflection of contemporary events in such works. Around 2 hours per week will be spent in lectures and seminars studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
   The Everyday in Modern French Fiction 
   
   
   The module looks at the various ways in which the novel has evolved and adapted to "the contemporary" by responding to the "everyday". Giving an overview of the various approaches to the everyday in the contemporary novel from the 60s to the present, this module will explore how key authors negotiate, through their writing, the everyday's indeterminacy and the unstable space it occupies between the social and the individual. You will spend 2 hours a week in lectures and seminars on this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    La Republique Gaullienne: 1958 to 1969 
   
   
   
     The module explores how the Fifth Republic came into being and examines the problems of bedding in a regime that did nothing short of revolutionizing French political culture without jettisoning the key features of the 'modele republicain'. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Francophone Writing in Canada 
   
   
   
     This module studies a selection of texts which have played a significant part in establishing a tradition of Canadian writing in French. The module includes texts by both Quebecois and non-Quebecois writers. The texts are studied in the context of the specific cultures to which they belong and of the reception they found. You will spend 2 hours a week in lectures and seminars for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Dissertation in French 
   
   
   
     You'll undertake an in-depth study into a chosen subject within French and Francophone Studies, and will produce a 7,500 word dissertation. Teaching takes place in the form of regular individual meetings with the allocated supervisor, and group meetings with the module convenor, centred more generally on research and writing skills.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Hearing Cultures 
   
   
   
     This module encourages you to think critically about the role of sound in everyday life through a range of historical case studies from the late eighteenth century to the present day. All kinds of sounds are examined in relation to their cultural and social significance, from unwanted sounds such as noise, through to routine and unnoticed sounds such as those of radio and television, through to highly valued sounds such as music. You’ll have a weekly three hour workshop.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Contesting Culture 
   
   
   
     You’ll examine the contested nature of culture in a variety of contexts through 3 hours in lectures and seminars. Beginning with a definition that includes the arts and media, you’ll broaden out to consider cultural practices in a range of situations, addressing the key questions: who defines and controls culture and for what purposes and, conversely, what kinds of opportunities exist for cultural and creative resistance? 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Comics and Visual Narrative 
   
   
   
     You’ll explore the medium of comics both as popular culture and as visual language during 3 hours of lectures and seminars each week. Beginning with a history of graphic sequential narrative together with an introduction to literary approaches to narrative (narratology), you’ll look at issues around censorship, cultural value, aesthetics and narrative form. Authors will include: Kevin Huizenga, Art Spiegelman, Marjane Satrapi, Chris Ware, Daniel Clowes, Bryan Talbot, Harvey Pekar, Julie Doucett, Joe Sacco, Jeffrey Brown, Neil Gaiman and James Kochalka.