Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory:  
  
    Introduction the French and Francophone Studies 
   
   
    You will receive a firm grounding in the structures of French through the core language module. You will also follow a core module 'Introduction to French and Francophone Studies' which will prepare you for studying the range of topics and skills you will develop in your degree course. You will also take additional modules in French literature and the history and politics of contemporary France.   
   
  
      
   
  
    French 1
    
   
  
    You’ll develop your understanding of the French language including grammar, written expression, aural and oral skills. 3 hours per week will be spent in lectures, workshops, and oral classes with a native speaker studying for this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
      
    Optional:  
  
    France: History and Identity
    
   
   
    The module aims to introduce students to the course of French history since the late Middle Ages through the study of a series of historical figures, their times and lives, how their 'stories' are written and woven into the fabric of 'le roman de la nation' (the national story) and how they have been appropriated to serve a range of different ends. It will also introduce students to the iconography and visual manifestations of the French historical landscape.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to French Literature: Landmarks in Narrative
    
   
   
    This module aims to introduce students to the critical study of French narrative, covering key examples of novels from the seventeenth century to the present. In studying each text we will focus on (a) understanding the text within its historical context, and (b) developing critical approaches to the text. The module will develop students’ key skills in literary study, from the basics of understanding a text with unfamiliar syntax and vocabulary, to close reading and the application of complex literary theories.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary France
    
   
   
    This module will focus on a selection of themes: French political institutions, with particular emphasis on the presidency; political parties in France; Immigration and identity, including questions of identity in contemporary French culture.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to French Literature: Representations of Paris
    
   
   
    This module aims to introduce students to the comparative study of literature and culture, inviting students to consider how Paris is represented in a range of texts (poetic, narrative and filmic) in the modern period (post-1800). Students will learn reading techniques adapted to different genres and media, and to consider representations of the city within their broader social, historical and critical contexts.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
    Compulsory:  
  
    French 2
    
   
   
    Building upon the language module studied in Year 1, you’ll further improve your skills in reading, listening, speaking, creative writing and translation. You’ll spend 2 hours per week in workshops and in oral classes with a native speaker for this module.  
   
  
      
   
    Options:  
  
    Francophone Africa: Exploring Contemporary Issues through Culture
    
   
   
    Through literature, film and popular culture, you’ll explore a range of political and social issues relevant to contemporary sub-Saharan Francophone Africa. Spending around 2 hours a week in lectures and seminars, you’ll be given an overview of the history of the French language in Africa and introduced to the range of varieties of French spoken there today.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Modern French Poetry
    
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to three major figures in modern French poetry (Baudelaire, Rimbaud and Apollinaire) and to the major formal developments in poetry in the period 1850-1914. Learning how to analyse, interpret and write commentaries on poetry, you’ll spend around 2 hours per week studying in lectures and seminars.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Difference and equality in post-war French thought
    
   
   
    This module explores two key texts by prominent French and Francophone thinkers: Roland Barthes's 'Mythologies' and Frantz Fanon's 'Les Damn&eacute;s de la terre'. It considers the equality and inequality of class, gender and race through close readings of the texts within the wider context of twentieth-century French and Francophone history and culture as well as in relation to major philosophical and theoretical ideas and traditions. You’ll have a one hour lecture as well as a one hour workshop per week to study this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    The Golden Age of French Cinema
    
   
   
    Studying a range of French films from the early days of cinema up to the post-war period, you’ll examine the development of French cinema and the evolution of film-making techniques. Films studied will include the work of M&eacute;li&egrave;s, Bu&ntilde;uel, Vigo, Carn&eacute; and Renoir. You’ll spend around 3 hours per week in lectures and seminars for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Approaches to post-1990 fiction
    
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to the study of recent literature, considering themes such as immigration, the position of women, reality television and responses to terrorism. You’ll spend around 2 hours per week in lectures and seminars.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Sociolinguistics: an Introduction
    
   
   
    In this introduction to sociolinguistics, you’ll consider the social contexts of language use, paying particular attention to intercultural communication, politeness, linguistic determinism, language choice, speech act theory, and approaches to the study of speech. You’ll be required to do weekly readings and to engage in discussions during a 2 hour lecture held once a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Sixteenth-century French Literature: An Introduction
    
   
   
    This module provides a general introduction to sixteenth-century writing. Topics to be studied include: humanism and the heritage of the classical world; the rise of the novel; morality and first-person writing; writing and gender; censorship and religious conflict; the representation of non-European cultures. You will spend 2 hours a week in lectures and seminars for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    20th-Century Women’s life-writing
    
   
   
    This module aims to develop your ability to interpret literary texts by studying works by Marguerite Duras, Annie Ernaux and Marie Cardinal, as well as theoretical works focusing on questions of gender and sexuality. You’ll spend around 2 hours a week in lectures and seminars if you study this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Women and the French State
    
   
   
    Examining the changing role of women in France, you’ll focus on issues of family, motherhood and work, whilst also considering the role played by women in French politics, as voters and as politicians. Around 2 hours per week will be spent in lectures and seminars if you study this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Seventeenth-century Literature and Society
    
   
   
    You’ll consider the relationship between literature and society through the study of the poetry of Malherbe and Th&eacute;ophile de Viau, "Dom Juan" by Moliere, and the "Fables" of La Fontaine. You’ll spend around 2 hours in lectures and seminars studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    French Cinema – The New Wave
    
   
   
    Introducing you to teaching in film analysis, you’ll consider a particular period of French cinema through a detailed study of the New Wave. You’ll spend between 2-3 hours a week in lectures and seminars for this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Post-War French Theatre
    
   
   
    Examining the experimental theatre which flourished in France in the 1950s and 1960s, you’ll consider authors such as Genet, Beckett and Ionesco. Focusing on dramatic technique, theory, and performance, you’ll spend around 2 hours per week studying in lectures and seminars.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Caribbean Francophone Writing
    
   
   
    In this introduction to literature in French from the Caribbean, you’ll study texts by authors from Martinique and Guadeloupe, and will combine discussion of the contexts with critical analyses of the texts themselves. You’ll spend around 2 hours per week in lectures and seminars if you study this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Huit tableaux. Art and Politics in Nineteenth-Century France (1799-1871)
    
   
   
    You’ll examine the course of French history from the Consulate (1799) to the Paris Commune (1871). Using works of art as a platform, you’ll explore political choices and change, tracing how a succession of regimes struggled and failed in the aftermath of the Revolution, as well as tackling issues of national identity, religion and political culture. Among the pieces considered are David's Sacre de Napol&eacute;on, Delacroix's La Libert&eacute; guidant le peuple, and Meissonier's Le Si&egrave;ge de Paris. 2 hours will be spent in lectures and seminars each week studying this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Linguistic Variation in France
    
   
   
    You’ll explore the different kinds of linguistic variation in France including those across time periods, geographical variation, social groups, class, and disparity between oral and written forms. You’ll also be introduced to the history of the French language and its recent developments, spending around 2 hours per week in lectures and seminars.   
   
  
      
   
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  This year will be spent in France or a Francophone country on a programme of studies in a higher education institution, as an assistant in a school or on a work placement. For more information, see the Department of French and Francophone Studies' Study Abroad page.   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules   
  
  
  
    French 3
    
   
   
    Building on the skills gained in Years 1 and 2, you’ll further develop your oral and written skills, translation into and out of French, creative writing in different registers, linguistic commentary and production of summaries, as well as perfecting your French grammar and vocabulary. In the course of this year-long module, you’ll spend 2 hours per week in language workshops and in oral classes with a native speaker.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Citizenship, Ethnicity and National Identity in Post-War France
    
   
   
    You’ll examine the range of social, political and philosophical questions raised by mass immigration to France in the post-war period. These questions will be tackled through historical analysis of patterns of migration and changing immigration policies, as well as through the study of relevant films, novels and theoretical texts. You’ll spend 2 hours each week in lectures and seminars studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Individual and Society
    
   
   
    You’ll explore the ways in which French social theory and fiction have thought through the changing nature of the individual and the self in society. You’ll spend 2 hours in lectures and workshops each week studying this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary Representations of Travel
    
   
   
    From tourism to exploration, from exile to migration, from pilgrimage to business travel, we will question the tacit ideologies found in contemporary travel discourses. The importance of this field has been steadily growing in between disciplines that range from literary studies to ethnography. The module will use these cross-cultural influences to create an arena in which to develop connections between key disciplines and different forms of arts (literature, ethnography, films photography). You will spend 2 hours a week in seminars for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Theories and Practices of Translation
    
   
   
    You’ll examine the history of translation and different translation models across a range of genres, including novel, drama, audiovisual media and poetry. For each theory, you’ll examine a number of case studies, either French texts translated into English or English texts into French. Spending around 1.5 hours per week in lectures, you’ll be encouraged to develop a critical and reflective approach to translation practice.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Peuple and Propaganda
    
   
   
    Studying various forms of artistic works taken from key moments in the French Revolutionary decade (1789 – 1799), you’ll consider the reflection of contemporary events in such works. Around 2 hours per week will be spent in lectures and seminars studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Everyday in Modern French Fiction
    
   
   
    The module looks at the various ways in which the novel has evolved and adapted to “the contemporary” by responding to the “everyday”. Giving an overview of the various approaches to the everyday in the contemporary novel from the 60s to the present, this module will explore how key authors negotiate, through their writing, the everyday’s indeterminacy and the unstable space it occupies between the social and the individual. You will spend 2 hours a week in lectures and seminars on this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Language and Social Interaction
    
   
   
    This module undertakes a detailed study of spoken language as a fundamental resource for human action and social organisation. Examination of both ordinary conversation and institutional discourse will enable you to explore the ways in which actions are performed, identities constructed and context achieved through talk. You’ll have a 2 hour lecture each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Francophone Writing in Canada
    
   
   
    This module studies a selection of texts which have played a significant part in establishing a tradition of Canadian writing in French. The module includes texts by both Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois and non-Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois writers. The texts are studied in the context of the specific cultures to which they belong and of the reception they found. You will spend 2 hours a week in lectures and seminars for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Dissertation
    
   
   
    You’ll undertake an in-depth study into a chosen subject within French and Francophone Studies, and will produce a 7,500 word dissertation. Teaching takes place in the form of regular individual meetings with the allocated supervisor, and group meetings with the module convenor, centred more generally on research and writing skills.