Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   
    Essential Molecules, Genes and Cells (40 credits)  
   
   
    This module combines lectures and laboratory classes aims to introduce you to the structure and function of significant molecules in cells, and the important metabolic processes which occur inside them. You will study, amongst other topics, protein and enzyme structure and function, the biosynthesis of cell components, and the role of cell membranes in barrier and transport processes. You'll examine how information in DNA is used to determine the structure of gene products. Topics include DNA structure, transcription and translation and mutation and recombinant DNA technology.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Essential Skills in Genetics (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module focusses on developing the core skills needed by geneticists in scientific writing, data handling and analysis, experimental design and scientific presentations. Alongside lectures and workshops, small-group tutorials are an important component of this module. In these tutorials, you get to know the member of staff who will be your tutor for the duration of your studies, discuss scientific topics relevant to your degree, and practice key skills such as essay-writing and data-handling.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Life on Earth (20 credits)  
   
   
    Life on Earth provides an introduction to the fundamental characteristics and properties of the myriad of organisms which inhabit our planet, from viruses, bacteria and Archaea, to plants and animals. In weekly lectures, and regular laboratory practical classes, you will consider how living organisms are classified, how they are related genetically and phylogenetically, and basic aspects of their structure and function.  
   
  
      
   
   You must choose a minimum of one module (20 credits) from the following:  
   
    Evolution, Ecology and Behaviour  
    Physiology  
    Fundamentals of Neuroscience  
   
   
    Evolution, Ecology and Behaviour (20 credits)  
   
   
    Starting with Darwin’s theory of evolution, you will learn how natural selection and other evolutionary forces have shaped the ways in which organisms interact with each other and their environment. In addition to lectures, practical classes will give you hands on experience with a range of ecological and behavioural concepts in the laboratory and the field.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Physiology (20 credits)  
   
   
    In this module, you will be introduced to the physiology of the major systems e.g. cardiovascular, nervous, musculo-skeletal mostly in in man, including some aspects of drug action. This module will allow you to understand your biochemical and genetics knowledge in the context of the intact organism. This module includes lectures and laboratory classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamentals of Neuroscience (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module will give you a good grounding in the basic principles of the nervous system of humans and other animals. Topics will include neuroanatomy, cellular neuroscience, neuropharmacology, sensory systems, neuroendocrinology, memory, behavioural neuroscience and diseases of the nervous system. These will be delivered through weekly lectures and practical classes.  
   
  
      
   
   Further 20 credits of options -  
   You also have to choose an additional 20 credits worth of modules, which can be done from selecting one further module from the three offered abouve or by picking Essential Chemistry (20 credits) or by selecting a module of your choice from those offered outside the School.  
   
    Chemistry for Life (20 credits)  
   
   
    To help you understand the chemical underpinnings of biochemistry you will study some essential chemistry in year 1 in lecture based modules which include interpretation of the periodic table, atomic properties, electron configuration, periodicity, structure and bonding, symmetry, coordination complexes and their properties), which underpins much of the study of chemistry. You will also develop an understanding of the basics of organic chemistry, including nomenclature, molecular structure and bonding, stereochemistry and the chemical reactivity of common functional groups and reaction types through an understanding of their electronic properties and how these are fundamental to biological reactions.  
   
  
      
   
   
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
    
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory:   
  
    Manipulating Genes and Genomes 
   
   
    Introduces the theoretical and practical basis of genetic engineering and gene manipulation. Using examples, manipulation of genes and genomes in bacteria, yeast and animals will be studied. You'll have eight two-hour lectures and three three-hour practicals in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Genes, Genomes and Chromosomes 
   
   
    Surveys the structure and function of the genes, genomes and chromosomes of eukaryotic cells. Emphasis is placed on understanding the molecular organisation of these elements and the experimental approaches that have led to this understanding. You will have a 2 hour lecture once per week to study this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Bacterial Genes and Development  
   
   
    Molecular events that occur during the control of gene expression in bacteria will be described. You'll consider case studies, which show how complex programmes of gene action can occur in response to environmental stimuli. You'll spend around three hours per week in lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Developmental Biology 
   
   
    Examines the basic concepts of vertebrate embryonic development. You’ll discuss specific topics including germ cells, blood and muscle cell differentiation, left-right asymmetry and miRNAs. You'll have a two-hour lecture once per week to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Investigating and Writing about Biology 
   
   
    You will be prepared for the challenges posed by scientific literature and the style of exam questions that you can expect in your second-year modules. This is followed by a research project into published work on a selected topic, presenting the information gained in an assessed dissertation. You will spend a total of fourteen hours within lectures and tutorials studying this module, plus nine two to three hour bioinformatics sessions in the computer laboratories.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Experimental Design and Analysis II 
   
   
    This module combines practical elements in experimental design (through forming hypotheses and testing them through practical work in Animal Behaviour) with a short lecture course outlining principles of statistical analysis. Studying for this module involves a total of seven hours of lectures, plus four three-hour practicals and a three-hour workshop of student presentations.  
   
  
      
   
   
      
    
     Optional Modules:   
    
   
  
    Medical Molecular Genetics 
   
   
    Presents information on the Human Genome Project and the methods employed in disease gene identification. Topics you’ll cover include the identification of the genes responsible for some of the most common inherited disorders and the development of strategies for treatment. You will have a three-hour lecture once per week to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Evolutionary Biology of Animals 
   
   
    Introduces key evolutionary concepts and their application in the animal kingdom. Areas you’ll study include the history of evolutionary thinking, natural selection versus the neutral theory, sexual selection and human evolution. You will have a two-hour lecture once per week during this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular and Developmental Neurobiology 
   
   
    You’ll consider how the brain develops and connects, how the connections work, are maintained and repaired, how information is stored in the form of memory, and how our knowledge of neurobiology can be applied. This module involves a three-hour lecture once per week plus a total of two three-hour practicals.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Pharming 
   
   
    You’ll be provided with theoretical and practical knowledge about how transgenic organisms are engineered. The technologies used to generate transgenic animals and plants are assessed, with examples of those being developed for commercial uses studied. This module consists of a three-hour lecture once per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cell Biology 
   
   
    Outlines the structure and function of components in eukaryotic cells and shows how they interact on amultitude of levels. You’ll study recent advances in cellular physiology, including how cells regulate their environment. You will spend around three hours per week within lectures as well as a total of nine hours in practicals and workshops if you choose to study this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Immunobiology 
   
   
    An introduction to vertebrate immunity, the immune response to infection and the basis of immunological disorders in humans. You will spend around three hours per week in nine weeks of lectures studying this module plus two three-hour practicals.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Microbial Biotechnology 
   
   
    The topics you’ll study include the principles of genetic modification in prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms, including strain improvement strategies and biological control. You will have a three-hour lecture once per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Ecology 
   
   
    Introduces the study of populations and communities from an evolutionary point of view, and considers critically the extent of our understanding of ecological ideas. Study for this module consists of a four-hour lecture once per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Physiology 
   
   
    Introduces the study of populations and communities from an evolutionary point of view, and considers critically the extent of our understanding of ecological ideas. Study for this module consists of a four-hour lecture once per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Parasitology 
   
   
    You’ll consider the ecological specialisation of parasitic organisms and parasitism. Emphasis is given to understanding the survival strategies of parasites, through analysis of the costs/benefits of specific solutions to the problem of transmission between hosts. You will spend around three hours per week in lectures plus a three-hour practical studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
       
   
  
 
     
    
  
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory:   
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    The Project is a year-long level 3 module. You will undertake detailed research on a chosen topic after discussion with a supervisor. Each project will involve collection of data by means such as experiment, questionnaire or observation, as well as the analysis and interpretation of the data in the context of previous work.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Gene Regulation 
   
   
    Examines the mechanisms through which eukaryotic genes are expressed and regulated, with emphasis placed on recent research on transcriptional control in yeast and post-transcriptional control in eukaryotes. Studying this module will include having three hours of lectures per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Population Genetics 
   
   
    You’ll consider the history and practice of population genetics research, with a focus on a quantitative approach to the subject, with training in problem-solving skills. You will spend around two hours within lectures per week studying this module, plus a two-hour computer practical.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Conservation Genetics 
   
   
    Considers the genetic effects of reduced population size, especially relating to the conservation of endangered species. You’ll study topics including genetic drift and inbreeding in depth, from theoretical and practical standpoints. You'll spend around one and a half hours per week in lectures studying this module, plus a two and a half hour computer practical.  
   
  
      
   
  
    General Genetics 
   
   
    Through group discussions, you’ll consider developments in genetics. You will also give a presentation on an assigned research paper. Around 8 hours will be spent in seminars as well as around 2 hours within workshop per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Ageing, Sex and DNA Repair 
   
   
    Examines the molecular causes of the ageing and malignant transformations of somatic cells that are observed during a single lifespan, and the necessity to maintain the genome intact from one generation to the next. Around three hours per week will be spent within lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
    
   
      
    
     Optional Modules:   
    
   
  
    Pathogens 
   
   
    A detailed understanding of the genetics and biochemistry behind the properties of parasites and microorganisms that cause major human diseases in the present day. You will have a three-hour lecture once per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Evolution 
   
   
    Examines the ways in which DNA and protein sequences are used to investigate evolutionary relationships among organisms. You’ll study topics including the techniques of sequence comparison and the construction of evolutionary trees. You will spend three hours of lectures per week plus a total of two three-hour practicals in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Developmental Biology 
   
   
    Explains the key concepts in developmental biology and focuses on stem cells and their uses in embryos and in adult organisms. You will have a 3 hour lecture once per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cancer Genetics 
   
   
    You’ll examine a selection of acquired and inherited cancers, and develop an understanding of the role of the genes involved and how they can be analysed. To study for this module you will have a 3 hour lecture once per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Human Genetics 
   
   
    You’ll cover recent developments in the genetic approach to human disease, and will examine new findings in the study of disorders such as diabetes. If you choose this module you will spend around three hours per week within lectures, and there will be an eight hour seminar session.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Human Variation 
   
   
    Examines genetic variation in humans, including variation at the DNA level, and the study of human population history using genetic methods. Around three hours per week will be spent within lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Science and Society 
   
   
    This module will explore the interactions between science and society through a series of lectures, discussion groups and workshops. Topics that will be explored include the ethical parameters that govern how scientific work is constrained, ways in which scientific discoveries can/should be disseminated to the wider community, the wider responsibilities that follow the acquisition of new knowledge and the concept of ‘citizen science’, where science takes place outside the traditional academic centres of work. This mode consists of a three-hour lecture incorporating discussion groups once per week.  
   
  
      
   
   
       
   
  
 
     
    
  
   Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory:   
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    The project is a year-long module. Preparatory work (literature review and familiarisation with laboratory/field safety protocols etc.) occurs in autumn, with the bulk of the practical work in spring. You’ll choose the topic of your project from a list of suggestions relevant to your degree subject and will finalise this after consultation with your supervisor. The project involves an extensive piece of detailed research. Reading and collating earlier research by other scientists working in the area is an essential component. You’ll use your literature review to write a research grant proposal, which outlines the hypotheses to be tested, the proposed experimental design and the research costs associated with the project. The practical component involves collection of data from a laboratory or field investigation and appropriate analysis. Your findings will be interpreted in the context of previous work, and written up in a clear and concise final report in the form of a research paper.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Presentation Skills  
   
   
    An introduction to the presentation skills required in a modern scientific career. A series of lectures will provide you with background ideas about best practice in oral, written and internet-based research communication. Regular tutorials will require you to present and discuss with peers recent key papers in your broad field of study, and also to produce a written summary of a paper for a lay audience. In workshops, you will be asked to prepare a webpage and a poster using appropriate software. You will have between one and eight hours of lectures and workshops per week when studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
    
   
      
    
     Optional Modules:   
    
   
  
    Cutting-Edge Research Technologies in Molecular Biology 
   
   
    This module will bring you up to date with the latest technological developments in molecular biology that you are unlikely to have encountered in detail in your first three years. We also discuss and explore how new technologies with broad implications come into existence and follow the process of establishment, acceptance and dissemination through the scientific community. ou will have a 3 hour workshop once per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Experimental Design and Analysis 
   
   
    This is an advanced level biological statistics module, building on basic undergraduate (Levels 1 and 2) training. Lectures discuss concepts in experimental design, biological probability, generalised linear modelling and multivariate statistics. Practical sessions build on this conceptual outline, giving you hands-on experience of problem solving and analytical software, and some basic programming skills. You will spend three to four hours within lectures and workshops when studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Process and Practice in Science 
   
   
    A consideration of science ‘as a process’, with brief introductions to the history, philosophy and sociological norms of science. You will cover aspects of the scientific literature and scientific communication, peer review, 'metrics’, including citation analysis, journal impact factors, and the 'h' and other indices of measuring scientists' performances. You will also cover ethics in science and the changing relationship between scientists, government and the public. You will have a three hour lecture once per week during this module.