Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer.  
  More detailed geography module information can be found on the school's website.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   
    Understanding the Past - Introduction to Archaeology  
   
   
   
     This module will provide you with an introduction to archaeology as a discipline. It covers the development of the subject and examines methods for discovering, recovering and analysing archaeological remains. Archaeological prospection/survey, excavation, post-survey/excavation analysis, approaches to dating, materials analysis and an introduction to frameworks of social interpretation are all themes addressed within the module. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures, seminars, practical classes, computer workshops and a field trip, on average taking up two hours per week across a full year.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Introduction to Archaeological Science  
   
   
   
     The use of methods from biological and earth sciences has transformed the practice of archaeology from the discovery of radiocarbon dating to establish chronology in distant prehistory to the use of stable isotope analysis to trace the movements and diet of past populations. This module will introduce you to some of the key developments in archaeological science over the last 50 years and will show you how scientific methods have dramatically changed our understanding of the past. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures, seminars and practical classes on average taking up about 2 hours per week across a full year. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Forest to Farmers: Prehistoric Archaeology of Britain  
   
   
   
     This module provides an overview of the archaeology of the British Isles from the earliest traces of human activity until the Roman invasion of Britain. It will introduce you to key concepts in prehistoric archaeology through study of the major archaeological finds and sites of the period from henges to the hillforts of Wessex. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 4 hours per week across the autumn semester.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Rome to Revolution: Historical Archaeology of Britain  
   
   
   
     This module provides you with an overview of the archaeology of the British Isles from the Roman invasion until the industrial revolution. Using key sites and discoveries, students will be introduced to the challenges of understanding the archaeology of periods partially documented in textual sources. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 4 hours per week across the spring semester. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Great Discoveries in Archaeology  
   
   
   
     In this module the staff of the archaeology department will share the sites and discoveries that not only inspired them but have also been major benchmarks in the development of the discipline. Each lecture focuses on a major discovery or theory that has fundamentally changed previous held interpretations of the past. The module also looks at the personalities and ideologies that have shaped our discipline, noting how changing perspectives on gender, ethnicity and class have in turn shaped ideas about the past. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the autumn semester. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Bones, Bodies and Burials: the Archaeology of Death  
   
   
   
     This module examines the many types of archaeological evidence represented through the treatment of human remains from prehistory until the early modern period. You will learn how the study of human remains can give insights into past diets, social status, health and attitudes towards different members of society, while the study of burial practices can tell about the structure of societies and their beliefs. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the spring semester. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Interpreting Geographical Data  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll be given a theoretical and practical training to enable you to undertake basic spatial analysis within a contemporary Geographic Information System (GIS).  You’ll have lectures, practical sessions, linkages to associated textbooks and theory topics delivered via WEBCT. This module will ensure competency in the use of GIS software whilst developing ICT skills. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures and practicals. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Exploring Human Geography  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll be introduced to current issues in human geography. You’ll critically examine complex relations between people and places by considering key themes and concepts in current human geography with close attention paid to innovative work in cultural, historical, environmental, economic and development geography.  This module provides the foundations for further specialised study in Years 2 and 3.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Tutorial  
   
   
   
     This module consists of small group tutorials in both the autumn and spring semesters in which emphasis will be placed on discussion, essay writing and seminar presentations. These will be based on topics in the qualifying-year geography modules and from broader intellectual, cultural and political fields. You will have a one-hour tutorial each week.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Orientation and Study Skills 
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to introduce you to study programmes offered by the School of Geography,  to equip you with the knowledge and skills required to perform well at University, and to impart understanding of the nature and craft of University-level study. This module is organized through a series of weekly one hour lectures. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Geographical Field Course  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll undertake a four day intensive residential field study trip. Teaching will focus on the rationale and techniques of field study in both human and physical aspects of geography. An emphasis is placed on the design, practice and analysis of small research projects based on geographical issues.  You’ll gain and develop a range of skills including applying research design and execution skills, evaluate field based techniques amongst other valuable skills necessary in carrying out field study. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Physical Landscapes of Britain  
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to provide an understanding of the history and origins of Earth and its life and platforms. Attention is paid to the way Britain has formed via tectonic and geomorphological processes with a number of case studies being presented. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, practicals and field trips.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory
   
   
   
    Archaeological Research: Theory and Practice  
   
   
   
     This module is aimed at helping you to develop more advanced research skills and to discover the methods that are used in major archaeological research projects. In particular you will be introduced to the research methods that you will put into practice in your third year dissertation or independent project. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Research Tutorial  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll cover the breadth of world-leading research being carried out in the school of Geography reflected in the School’s four research themes: Cultural and Historical Geography, Economic Worlds, Environment & Society, and Geosciences.  For this module you’ll have an introductory lecture and fortnightly tutorials.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Optional  
   
    Techniques in Physical Geography  
   
   
   
     This module provides the opportunity for hands-on experience of laboratory, field and survey techniques in physical geography appropriate to the interest of the student.  To complete this module, students will take part in 6 field projects on an 8-day field course, with further work conducted in the laboratory back in Nottingham. You’ll have a combination of lectures, field trips and computing sessions for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Techniques in Human Geography  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll understand and experience human geography research methods through participation in three practical projects.  This will aid you in exploring methods for students undertaking primary research in human geography including for their dissertation.  For this module you’ll have lectures, practicals and independent learning. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    River Channel Forms and Dynamics  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll be introduced to the fluid and sediment processes that operate in rivers.  You’ll also learn about the characteristics channel forms of alluvial channels and the links between process and form.  Some other topics covered includes: The foundations of fluvial geomorphology, Dominant discharge and Spaces and timescales of river change. You’ll have lectures, seminars, laboratory practical, independent study and revisions, and 3 days of field study. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Patterns of Life  
   
   
   
     This module focuses on the patterns of distribution of organisms in space and time, and theories proposed to explain these patterns. Some of the themes covered in this module include: Biodiversity patterns, Extinct and mass extinctions and the process of biogeographical research. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, seminars, group discussions and self-directed learning/reading and coursework preparation. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Rural Environmental Geography  
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to provide you with a broad knowledge of the rural environmental issues in geography. Some of the topics covered include: the interactions between environmental issues and human actions, the green and gene revolutions, and the prospects for future landscape change in Britain. For this module you’ll have a one 2-hour lecture per week.   
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Dissertation Preparation  
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to prepare you for the undertaking of your dissertation, which is a significant piece of supervised research that includes working in the field, collecting primary and/or secondary data, conducting a literature review, undertaking independent research and writing up your research to produce a significant piece of original scholarship. This module is taught by formal lectures, scheduled preliminary fieldwork, and supervision meetings you’re your dissertation tutor.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Underwater Archaeology  
   
   
   
     This module provides you with a broad introduction to the current methods and practice of underwater Archaeology. The module focuses on themes such as lake dwellings, shipwrecks, submerged cities and sunken harbours. Case studies are used ranging in space from Scandinavia to Australia and in time from BC 1500 to the last century. Some of the issues tackled in this module include; Methods and techniques of underwater excavation, Problems of conservation and underwater material, Sunken harbours, cities and processes of submergences, and Lake dwelling and freshwater archaeology among others. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Archaeology and Society: Heritage and Professional Skills  
   
   
   
     Heritage is now a major global industry with over 450,000 jobs linked to the heritage sector in the UK alone. This module will help you gain an understanding of how archaeology works in the UK including the legal framework covering heritage within the planning process and the use of metal detectors. You will also study the different ways in which archaeology is communicated to the wider world through multiple media and will work in groups on the public presentation of a local site. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Archaeological Evidence 1 and 2  
   
   
    These two modules run across the full academic year and allow you to focus on two specialised topics per semester, choosing from options including Glass, Metallurgy, Zooarchaeology, Archaeobotany, Building Survey, Lithics, Ceramics, and Human Skeletal Remains. Each topic is taught in a 5-week intensive block using lectures and seminars covering 3 hours per week across the academic year.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Introduction to the Archaeology of the Roman Empire  
   
   
    This module provides an overview of the archaeology of the Roman Empire, developing themes encountered in the first year Rome to Revolution module. It traces the development of the Roman world and examines the archaeology of the Empire’s provinces. Specific themes in this course include town, villas and the countryside, and housing the army among other related topics. For this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year.  
   
  
      
   
   
    The Medieval World  
   
   
    This module considers the archaeology of Europe and the Mediterranean from the end of the Roman Empire to the high Middle Ages (from c. AD 400–1400). Key topics include: the formation of post-Roman societies; rural settlement; the emergence of central places and the development of towns; trade and exchange; and the introduction of Christianity and the role of the Church. The lectures and seminars, totalling around 2 hours per week, will explore integrated approaches to archaeological evidence incorporating landscapes, standing buildings, excavated sites and material culture.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Mediterranean Prehistory  
   
   
    This module examines the background to its rise and nature of the first civilisations of Europe: the Minoan and Cycladic cultures of the Early Bronze Age in the Aegean. It takes a long chronological perspective, and places particular emphasis on the ‘proto-urban’ cultures of the Early Bronze Age, the first rise of palatial civilisation on Crete, the development of Iron Age societies in Greece and Italy, and what we can learn about them through archaeology. For this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory
   
   
   
    Dissertation BA  
   
   
   
     This module is an individual project based on geographical topic involving a field study agreed by the student, tutor and specialist supervisor.  The dissertation is a significant piece of supervised research that includes field work, collection of primary and/or secondary data, conducting a literature review, independent research and finally writing your research to produce a significant piece of original scholarship. You’ll have a combination of project supervision meetings with your dissertation advisor, extensive scheduled fieldwork, and guided independent study.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
  OR either 
   
   
    Dissertation in Archaeology  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll be able to carry out an in-depth investigation of a chosen area, to be agreed with your supervisor in advance. The topic  
    
   
     should be based on an area you have covered in previous modules. You’ll use the skills that your degree has equipped you with thus far to  
    
   
     complete the work required. There will be a mix of contact to achieve this including tutorials, workshops and lectures. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Or 
   
   
    Independent Research Project  
   
   
   
     Students not undertaking a dissertation in archaeology will carry out an independent research project in the autumn or spring semester, using skills they have acquired in earlier modules to research a subject of their choice under the guidance of an appropriate supervisor. For this module you will meet with you supervisor in individual tutorials.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
   
    The Landscape History of Liguria  
   
   
   
     This module will introduce the principles of historical ecology and landscape history, drawing on a wide range of sources (including historical maps and documents, field survey of vegetation and landscape features and oral history,) using Liguria as a case study. . Management, teamwork and communications skills will be developed through a field trip to Liguria. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture for this module as well as a one-day field trip during the semester.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Quaternary Environments  
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to use the lowlands of the Yucatan peninsula, Mexico to explore the relationship between climate, environment and society over the timescale of the Quaternary. You’ll explore a range of data sources for past environment change as well as considering the implications on future climate change in this low tropical region.  For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures and a residential field course to Mexico for 10 days. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    European Urban Geographies (Berlin Fieldcourse)  
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to provide an understanding of the evolution, socio-economic, political, and cultural dynamics of the city of Berlin. This module is split into two parts; the first part involves a series of lectures to provide background in advance to the field course, and the second part involves a 5-day field trip to Berlin. As a student you’ll be expected to develop a broad and critical understanding of the geographies or European cities and their regions, particularly Berlin. For this module you’ll have lectures and complete the field trip to Berlin.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Ecosystem Services and Human Well-being  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll be introduced to the concepts of landscape ecology and landscape management and provides a critical understanding of the different management strategies in the context of sustainable development. Topics covered in this module include: Introduction to Landscape Ecology, Landscape monitoring, and Patterns and process in landscape ecology. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    The Cultural Geography of English Landscape  
   
   
   
     The module addresses issues of landscape and culture in England from the eighteenth century to the present day. Key themes will include landscape and national identity and relations of city and country. The module usessources including archives, literature, paintings, prints, poetry, maps, film and photographyThe course consists of weekly 2-hour lectures as well as a one-day field trip to Derwent Valley.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Rome and the Mediterranean  
   
   
   
     In this module you will examine the archaeological evidence for the Roman period in Italy and the Mediterranean from 300 BC to AD 550. The major social, cultural and economic changes of the region in this period will be discussed as well as in the context of wider historical and archaeological approaches to the Mediterranean. You’ll have an hour of lectures and an hour-long seminar for this module 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Beastly Questions  
   
   
   
     This module is about the human-animal relationships that are fundamental to all societies since they shape diets, economies, landscapers and beliefs but also cultural ideologies. The study of the human-animal interaction can provide detailed insight into the structure and worldview of past societies. This module sets out to provide new insights into mainstream archaeological questions. During the course you will investigate a wide range of issues included the hunter gatherer/ farming transition, the impact of the roman empire; the creation and meaning of ancient landscapes; expressions of social status, ethnicity and gender. For this module you will have a combination of lectures, seminars and workshops for one semester.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    The Archaeology of the Medieval City  
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to provide you with a broad knowledge of the archaeological evidence for the development of cities and urban life in the later medieval period AD 1000-1500, with a focus on English towns and cities in their wider Europe context. The module will explore the integration of varied sources of archaeological evidence including urban landscapes, buildings and material culture, and particular emphasis placed on interdisciplinary approaches to urban economic and social life. For this module you will have a combination of lectures, seminars, workshops and a fieldtrip over the period of 11 weeks.