Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  Typical year one modules  
  Core  
 
   Careers Skills for Geographers 
  
  
   
    Self-marketing and CVs  
    Preparing for interviews and assessment  
    Careers for geographers  
    Subject-focused vocational talk  
    Postgraduate study (masters and PhD)   
    Guest lectures (eg. from Royal Geographical Society - Institute of British Geographers)   
    Career planning   
   
   Topics will be delivered by the school's Career Advisor from the Careers and Employability Service (CES) and academics from the School of Geography.  
   Importantly, you will be expected to make regular use of the Careers and Employability Service (CES) to assist with progress during the year and attend a range of employer presentations and other events (eg. employer fairs).  
   The module aims to:  
   
    introduce the issues of career education and employability within the Geography undergraduate curriculum  
    develop and enhance the students' key skills for use in seeking work experience, graduate employment and postgraduate opportunities   
    provide students with the opportunity to critically evaluate and reflect on their personal and key skill development in the School of Geography and the University   
    inform students of the role of the Careers and Employability Service (CES)  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Earth and Environmental Dynamics 
  
  
   This module integrates knowledge taken from the atmosphere, oceans and continents to inform an understanding of global physical systems as they affect people and the environment. The module considers:  
   
    principles of climate and general circulation patterns in the atmosphere and ocean   
    principles of Earth and geomorphological systems  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide an understanding of the atmosphere and hydrosphere   
    develop knowledge of the terrasphere through learning about geoscience and geomorphology  
    provide a platform for interpreting geographical and environmental issues  
   
   On completion of the module, the students will have developed an ability to think analytically about physical and geomorphological processes and understand, synthesise and critically evaluate current debates on environmental issues within a broader conceptual and scientific framework.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Exploring Human Geography 
  
  
   The module provides students with introductory knowledge about current issues in human geography. It critically examines the complex relations between people and places through key themes and concepts in current human geography.  
   Attention is given to innovative work in cultural, historical, medical, environmental, economic and development geography and to the traditionally broad perspective of human geography as a whole. The module will examine a variety of key themes that may vary from year to year.  
   This module provides a foundation for more specialised human geography modules at Levels 2 and 3.  
   This module aims to provide undergraduates with detailed introductory knowledge and understanding of a range of current issues in human geography. The issues relate to current themes of interest across the broad range of human geography including cultural, medical, environmental, economic, development, financial and urban. A selection of these themes will be covered.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Geographical Field Course 
  
  
   A four day intensive residential field study period. Teaching will concentrate on the rationale and techniques of field study in both human and physical aspects of geography. Particular emphasis is placed on the design, practice and analysis of small research projects based on geographical issues.  
   The aims of this module are to:  
   
    provide a field course experience away from Nottingham   
    provide the opportunity to evaluate issues involved in applying research design and execution skills within the specific context of field-based research  
    provide the opportunity to evaluate field based techniques and approaches to the collection of geographical information   
    foster an awareness of the ethical issues related to data gathering   
    foster a culture of safe field work through awareness, management and practice of both general and specific safety issues  
    develop skills of risk assessment related to field work   
    further develop intellectual and communication skills gained with tutorials  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Interpreting Geographical Data 
  
  
   This module will provide the basic statistical concepts and techniques required for studying geography. Topics will include:  
   
    Spreadsheets and statistical packages  
    Introduction to statistical concepts   
    Descriptive statistics and distributions  
    Exploratory data analysis  
    Parametric and non-parametric tests  
    Correlation and regression  
    ANOVA  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the core concepts and techniques of geographical data handling  
    introduce students to the core concepts and practical applications in statistical analysis (parametric, non-parametric and spatial)  
    provide training in the use of standard packages for data handling and analysis (including a standard spreadsheet and a standard statistical package)  
    introduce students to the concepts of statistical thinking, of using statistical methods to present problems, to challenge assumptions and promote critical thinking  
    provide students with the grounding in the practical and technical skills necessary to support the student's work throughout the geography degree course including understanding quantitative concepts quoted in the literature and undertaking project and field-work  
    provide a basis for more specific technical modules, both core and optional, in the second and third years of the course  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Geographic Information Systems 
  
  
   The module provides students with the theoretical background and practical training to undertake basic spatial analysis within a contemporary Geographic Information System (GIS).   
   It aims to ensure competency in the use of a contemporary GIS software package whilst developing transferable ICT skills. It also encourages students to develop the analytical skills necessary for the creation of workflows that utilise the built-in analytical functionality of a GIS to solve a spatial problem.   
   Specific topics covered are:   
   
    What is GIS?  
    Cartographic principles behind GIS  
    Spatial data models and database management systems  
    Fundamental spatial analysis  
    Creating maps within a GIS  
   
   This module aims to develop the fundamental practical and conceptual skills necessary to undertake simple GIS analysis, and the theoretical and practical competency necessary to study GIS at a higher level.   
   It aims to introduce the student to commercially available software, instruct students in the use of this software in applied GIS analysis scenarios and ensures a solid theoretical and conceptual foundation in GIS fundamental methods and analyses.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Orientation and Study Skills 
  
  
   This module covers:  
   
    Orientation: academic study at University and in the School of Geography   
    Advanced study skills: The academic craft, introduction to studying effectively  
    Advanced study skills consolidation: Information - sources, quality, referencing  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce newly enrolled students to studying in the School of Geography  
    equip students with the knowledge and skills required to perform well at University level in the School of Geography  
    impart understanding of the nature and craft of University-level study  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Tutorial 
  
  
   Small group tutorials in both the Autumn and Spring semesters in which emphasis will be placed on discussion, essay writing and seminar presentations which will be based on topics in the Qualifying Year geography modules and from broader intellectual, cultural and political fields.  
   The aims of the module are to:  
   
    develop intellectual skills in small-group tutorials based on topics in Qualifying Year geography and from wider intellectual, cultural and political fields   
    develop skills of problem recognition and definition   
    develop powers to identify and evaluate approaches to problem-solving  
    develop skills of information collection and synthesis and evaluate the significance and relevance of information  
    develop powers of reasoning, discussion and cogent argument  
    develop communication skills in the form of essay writing, verbal articulation of ideas and issues through group discussions and seminar presentations  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   Exploring Place 
  
  
   The module introduces students to geographical research on place, conveying current research in the field, including that carried out within the School of Geography. Students will gain knowledge of key concepts and methodological approaches, with understanding developed through the examination of place-based case studies.  
   Lectures will outline developments in the geographical study of place in recent decades, and explore key themes such as place and memory, place and knowledge, and place and identity. The challenges and opportunities offered by the digital exploration of place will be outlined, using case studies of digital mapping and the public display of geographical information. Regional case studies will show how the research themes presented in the module can be brought together around the study of specific places and landscapes.  
   Throughout the module, staff will draw upon their own research as well as the wider academic literature, giving students a sense of the possibilities of geographical research exploring place.  
   This module aims to provide students with an introduction to the geographical understanding of place, conveying current research in the field, including that carried out within the School of Geography.  
   Students will gain knowledge of key concepts and methodological approaches in the exploration of place, with understanding developed through the examination of place-based case studies.  
  
 
     
  
 
   On Earth and Life 
  
  
   On Earth and Life explores the deep historical co-evolution of Earth and Life and emphasises uniqueness of place and historical contingency. The module leads on from and complements Physical Landscapes of Britain in exploring geological, plate tectonic and palaeoenvironmental ideas and research, but at the global scale.  
   The module also prepares the ground for and contextualises several second and third year geography modules, especially Environmental Change and Patterns of Life.  
   The aim of the module is to encourage students to explore the history of the Earth and life, as well as the history of ideas about the nature and evolution of the Earth's surface and the evolution and biogeography of plants, animals and humans.  
   On completing the module, students should know more about the evolution of the Earth and life and be able to assess critically the ideas and methods of researchers in the historical and geographical sciences.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Physical Landscapes of Britain 
  
  
   This module provides an understanding of the history and origins of the Earth and its life and landforms through consideration of the following topics:  
   
    Origins of the Earth   
    Development of life over geological time  
    Environmental changes over geological time  
    Field trip to the Peak District (full costs will be supplied nearer the time of the trip)  
   
   The aim of this module is to provide an understanding of the history and origins of the Earth and its life and landforms. Particular attention is paid to the way in which the area of Britain has formed via tectonic and geomorphological processes. Both systematic and regional approaches are used, with a number of case studies being presented.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Tracing Economic Globalisation 
  
  
   The module introduces students to contemporary and historical approaches to understanding economic globalisation and its spatial unevenness. Students will develop knowledge relating to globalisation as a set of discourses and practices using case studies relating to key themes of relevance.  
   Lectures will outline the key debates relating to globalisation as a phenomenon and will interrogate the relevance of the concept through an examination of commodities, labour and work, governance and money and finance.  
   The students will also explore the spatial unevenness of globalisation, and develop understandings of the ways in which globalisation has contributed to an increasingly unequal and differentiated society at a variety of scales. Alternatives to globalisation will also be discussed, focusing upon various counter-globalisation strategies in the forms of localism, activism and protest.  
   Throughout the module, staff will draw upon their own research as well as the wider academic literature, giving students a sense of the complexity, and importance, of globalisation as a set of theories and a set of sited realities.  
   This module aims to provide students with an introduction to the economic geographies of globalisation, providing an overview of contemporary research in the field, including that undertaken by staff within the School of Geography.  
   Students will gain knowledge of key concepts in the exploration of economic globalisation and this understanding will be developed through the study of pertinent geographical case studies.  
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year two modules  
  Core  
 
   Dissertation Preparation 
  
  
   This module is taught by formal lectures, scheduled preliminary fieldwork, supervision meetings with dissertation tutor. It covers the following:  
   
    Introduction to the dissertation process and procedures   
    What is a dissertation?   
    Ethics, risk and safety implications when conducting Geographical research   
    Preparing a dissertation proposal   
    Analysing material   
    Critically reflecting on literature and writing a coherent literature review   
    Evaluation of past dissertations  
   
   The aims of this module are to prepare undergraduate geography students for undertaking their 40 credit dissertation which is a significant piece of supervised research that includes working in the field, collecting primary and/or secondary data, conducting a literature review, undertaking independent research and writing their research up to produce a significant piece of original scholarship.  
   The module will equip students with an understanding of research design and methodology, will explore the nature of the dissertation and how to select a topic, determine appropriate methodologies and methods of analysis and will explain the ethical, risk and safety frameworks under which dissertations are undertaken. The module will detail the timetable, procedures and processes that students need to follow in order to complete the dissertation.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Tutorial 
  
  
   This module will cover the breadth of world-leading research being carried out in the School of Geography and is reflected in the school's research themes.  
   The two lectures will introduce the role, breadth and practice of research in geography. Joint delivered by researchers on the physical and human sides of the discipline, the lectures will examine the epistemological and philosophical bases of research in geography, with a focus on the diversity but also shared, unifying features of geographical research, providing broader context for the small group tutorials.  
   Each student will be assigned to a small tutorial group for the semester and will participate in tutorials with a different member of staff. Specific topics will be chosen by staff members based on their own, active, research programs and will reflect the leading research questions and problems in the discipline. Students will be supplied with a set of readings prior to each tutorial. Students will also be required to research the background context of the readings.  
   This module will expose students to the breadth and depth of research undertaken in geography. The module aims to develop a critical appreciation of contemporary research problems in geography and introduce students to alternative approaches to geographical research.  
   Students will benefit through discussing the complete research process, from idea and project development, to methods, dissemination and evaluation of research in geography.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Techniques in Physical Geography 
  
  
   This module presents the opportunity for hands-on experience of laboratory, field and surveying techniques in physical geography appropriate to the domain of interest of the participants. To achieve these aims all students participate in six field projects on a eight day field course, some of which are completed in the laboratory back in Nottingham.  
   In addition, students choose further laboratory techniques to investigate in the second semester, leading to an individual project. The ethical, safety and fieldwork limitations of geographical work are also considered.  
   The aim of this module is to provide training in physical geography field and laboratory techniques.  
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   Cultural and Historical Geography 
  
  
   This module introduces students to cultural and historical geography, including:  
   
    The development of cultural and historical geography as sub-disciplines  
    The key thematic areas of contemporary cultural and historical geography, including landscape, identity, culture, power and knowledge   
    The theoretical underpinnings of cultural and historical geography   
    The links between cultural and historical geography and other fields of enquiry in the humanities and social sciences   
    The methods and sources used in cultural and historical geographical research, including archives, texts and images, and field study   
    The work of key figures from the sub-disciplines past and present  
   
   The module aims to introduce students to the sub-disciplines of cultural and historical geography, covering both empirical and theoretical issues. Students are given a grounding in the contribution of geography to cultural and historical study, and the module thus provides a foundation for specialist modules and dissertation research within the School of Geography.  
   On completion of the module students will have a clear conception of cultural and historical geography as fields of enquiry, the ability to connect theoretical discussion with empirical case studies, and a clear appreciation of the methods and sources required for such work.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Desert Geomorphology 
  
  
   This module addresses the research issues and problems in desert environments. The module opens with a definition of deserts environments and a description of the characteristic features of deserts around the world. Key topics include:  
   
    The nature of deserts, aridity and drylands   
    Sediment production and weathering processes   
    Sediment entrainment by wind   
    The formation of sand dunes and dust deposits   
    Desert surfaces  
    The role of water  
   
   Throughout the module emphasis is placed upon past and current research including experimental design.  
   This module aims to provide:  
   
    an understanding of the geomorphology of desert environments   
    an ability to critically evaluate contested theories of desert landform development  
    an ability to evaluate the impact of vegetation and climate in desert processes  
    a foundation of skills and knowledge for further study of desert environments  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Digital Explorers 
  
  
   This module provides a consideration of:  
   
    Introduction to GI Science/Systems/Studies/Services   
    Spatial Data Types and Sources   
    Vector Processing Algorithms   
    Raster Processing Algorithms  
    Spatial Analysis and Decision Making   
    Professional Training in ArcGIS   
    Project planning, implementation and reporting  
   
   The aim of this module is to produce students that have both theoretical and technical competence in the use of GIS software for spatial data analysis. It encompasses both taught instruction and project based learning to ensure that students have sufficient skills to independently develop, justify, undertake and report a complex GIS-based analysis project in response to a project brief.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Economic Geography 
  
  
   The module will cover the following topics:  
   
    Economic globalisation  
    Changing geographies of the world economy during the 20th century   
    Economic geographies of advanced producer services   
    World cities   
    Distinctive spatialities of economic behaviour: industrial clusters, global production sites, and the creative economy, for example  
   
   The module aims to provide an understanding of the evolution of Economic Geography from a variety of perspectives. The module will build on foundation principles taught during the Qualifying Year and will feed in to more specialised, research-led modules in Part 2.  
   Students studying this module will be expected to develop a broad and critical understanding of the geographies of the global space economy, different ways of conceptualising change, and of the importance of different scales of analysis. The module will also consider these broader conceptual issues through the lens of particular empirical examples from around the world.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Environmental Change 
  
  
   This module considers the mechanisms for, and evidence of, global environmental change during the timescale of the Quaternary period. The nature, causes and impacts of change are evaluated in the context of the available evidence within a range of natural and human environments. The nature and impacts of future climate change are also considered.  
   This module aims to provide:  
   
    an understanding of the mechanisms driving global change at a range of different timescales  
    a knowledge of the existence and limitations of evidence for change  
    an appreciation of sources of information on this topic and how to integrate this knowledge into cogent written and oral arguments related to Quaternary environmental change  
    an ability to evaluate the nature of change from literature-based evidence  
    a foundation of skills and knowledge for further study of Quaternary environments and proxy records of change  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Medical Geography 
  
  
   This module explores aspects of medical geography, with special reference to the geography of infectious diseases. Topics include:  
   
    Nature of Medical Geography and the Geography of Health  
    History of Medical Geography  
    Epidemiological concepts   
    The disease record   
    The epidemiological transition   
    Spatial diffusion of infectious diseases   
    The geography of disease emergence and re-emergence   
    Islands as epidemiological laboratories   
    Geography of war and disease   
    Disease forecasting and control  
   
   The module aims to provide a comprehensive introduction to the rapidly developing interdisciplinary field of medical geography.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Patterns of Life 
  
  
   The module focuses on patterns in the distribution of organisms in space and time, and theories proposed to explain those patterns. The main themes are:  
   
    Biodiversity patterns   
    Island biogeography and nature conservation theory  
    Ecological succession  
    Biological invasions  
    Extinction and mass extinctions  
    Quaternary refugia and the palaeoecological record  
    The process of biogeographical research  
   
   The main aims of this module are to develop:  
   
    a broad knowledge of biogeographic patterns  
    an understanding of the theories proposed to explain these patterns  
    an ability to understand and interpret the biogeographic literature experience of biogeographical research  
   
   The primary focus is on patterns manifest at global spatial scales and long temporal scales. This knowledge is the basis for:  
   
    appropriate interpretation of human impacts on the environment  
    understanding and evaluating nature conservation theory and practice  
    understanding of the diversity and interdependence of the natural world  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   River Processes and Dynamics 
  
  
   Introduces the fluid and sediment processes that operate in rivers and describes the characteristic channel forms of alluvial channels and the links between process and form. Uses laboratory practicals and a fieldtrip to deliver student centred learning and supplement teaching through lectures. Topics covered include:  
   
    Foundations of fluvial geomorphology  
    Flow resistance, sediment transport and bank erosion  
    Introduction to biogeomorphology and aquatic ecology  
    Dominant discharge and hydraulic geometry  
    Laboratory practicals  
    Fieldtrip: fluvial processes and forms in the Hawkcombe catchment, Somerset   
    Spaces and timescales of river change   
    River planforms: braided, meandering and straight   
    Morphological adjustments in an unstable channels   
    Complex response in the fluvial system  
   
   This module assumes no prior knowledge in introducing the fundamentals of fluid flow, sediment transport and bank erosion in rivers. Semester one builds on the underpinning science of open channel flow to examine the processes that lead to channel formation and the creation and maintenance of acquatic habitat.  
   At the beginning of semester two, the mechanics and concepts covered are brought together through consideration of regime theory and hydraulic geometry in alluvial channels. Semester two also deals with the dynamics of rivers with straight, meandering and braided patterns. It goes on to investigate trends of change exhibited by unstable rivers and how simple disturbances can trigger complex responses in the fluvial system.   
  
 
     
  
 
   Rural Environmental Geography 
  
  
   This module explores a range of rural environmental issues in the global South and supplements macro-scale perspectives on the evolution of environmentalism and development thinking with closer examinations of rural environmental issues from the perspective of a range of different stakeholders.  
   Throughout the module, particular attention is placed on how environmental use and management varies by socio-economic status, community and gender. Emphasis is placed on the viewpoints of different stakeholders regarding the rural environmental issues they experience. As the module is based strongly on research-led teaching, a significant proportion of the case studies given in lectures are centred on India.  
   The main aims of this module are to:  
   
    enhance understanding of the evolution of environmentalism and development thinking  
    investigate rural environmental issues from a range of time periods and locations in the global South and from the perspectives of stakeholders from different socio-economic, gender and community groups  
    heighten appreciation of the different environmental knowledge systems possessed by these different stakeholder groups and the impacts of these on environmental management  
    investigate the impacts of agricultural modernisation on different socio-economic, gender and landowner groups  
    critically examine the value of participatory appraisal for investigating rural environmental problems and issues  
    foster an appreciation of the complexity of rural environmental issues over a range of time scales and spatial contexts  
   
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year three modules  
  Core  
 
   Dissertation BSc 
  
  
   This is an individual project based on a geographical topic involving fieldwork and/or secondary data, and agreed by the candidate with their tutor and a specialist supervisor.  
   The aims are:  
   
    Developing skills of problem recognition and definition  
    Raising awareness of and responding to the ethical issues related to gathering data  
    Implementing risk assessment skills related to fieldwork and developing a culture of safety and appropriate research practices  
    The opportunity to develop and apply research design and investigation skills in a field-based environment   
    Enhance skills of information collection and synthesis, and the ability to evaluate the significance and relevance of information  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   Advances in Remote Sensing 
  
  
   The anticipated content and structure is:  
   Part I - Principles and Systems  
   
    Introduction: the past, present and the future  
    Electromagnetic radiation and the terrestrial environment  
    Interaction of radiation with matter   
    Interaction of radiation with matter   
    Sensing systems from a range of vantage points   
    Remote sensing scale and data selection issues   
    Using remote sensing data I, II and III   
   
   Part II - Information Extraction  
   
    Exploiting advances in the spatial, spectral and temporal domains   
    Exploiting strengths of data: data fusion   
    Technological innovations   
    Integrating remote sensing and GIS   
    Practising remote sensing   
    Student led assessment  
   
   The aim of the module is to provide an advanced study into the rapidly evolving field of remote sensing. The module will cover the basic physical principles of remote sensing, key remote sensing systems, digital image processing and applications.  
   The main focus of the module is on the remote sensing of the terrestrial environment using a range of sensors, at a range of vantage points. The students will be taken to the research frontier within the discipline with exposure to the current issues, for example, use of volunteered information, terrestrial and atmospheric carbon accounting and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).  
  
 
     
  
 
   Environment, Development and Livelihoods 
  
  
   This module investigates key linkages between development, livelihood and environmental problems in the global South with particular reference to competition and conflict over environmental resources. Attention is placed on exploring livelihood-environment interactions from the perspectives of different income, gender and community groups and contrasting their everyday realities with key development concepts and aggregate statistics.  
   The module contains a mixture of lecture-based sessions, seminar-based sessions and workshops involving role-play, practical exercises and data analysis. The module emphasises the importance of livelihood concerns to an understanding of the motivations of those participating in environmental management. As teaching is strongly research-led teaching, a significant proportion of the case studies given in lectures are centred on India.  
   The aims of this module are to:  
   
    enhance understanding of the interactions between livelihoods and environmental issues in the global South from the perspectives of people from different income, gender and community groups   
    take a political ecology approach to highlight variations in livelihood security by gender, community socio-economic status and dependence on natural resources  
    enhance understandings of how the 'messy realities' underlying key development concepts and aggregate statistics are experienced by different socio-economic, gender and community groups through participation in group-based role-play exercises  
    heighten appreciation of environment and livelihood interactions and how these are experienced by different socio-economic and gender groups in a range of geographical contexts   
    emphasise the diverse economic, socio-cultural linkages between environmental problems, livelihoods and development and foster an appreciation of the complexity of environmental issues at a range of scales and in different geographical contexts  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Environmental Informatics and Modelling 
  
  
   This module will expose students to current practices, technologies and ideas existing at the forefront of environmental modelling. The module offers an opportunity for students to experience the theory and practice associated with key developments that are occurring in major modelling domains and the most recent advances from the research community.  
   Hands-on experience of using machine-learning software and developing data-driven models will be an integral part of the learning experience.  
   The module will comprise four parts. Part one is composed entirely of 1-hour lectures, with parts two-four incorporating an alternating programme of lecture and practical classes.  
   
    Introduction   
    Modelling the Impacts of Climate Change   
    Modelling Biogeography   
    Hydroinformatics  
   
   This module will expose students to current practices, technologies and ideas existing at the forefront of environmental modelling. The module offers an opportunity for students to experience the theory and practice associated with key developments that are occurring in major modelling domains and the most recent advances from the research community.  
   Hands-on experience of using machine-learning software and developing data-driven models will be an integral part of the learning experience.  
  
 
     
  
 
   European Urban Geographies (Berlin Fieldcourse) 
  
  
   The module will cover the following topics:  
   
    The historical development of a major European city, to be visited on a field excursion (full costs will be supplied nearer the time of the trip)  
    A critical approach to the cultural, historical, social and economic geography of same city  
    A wide range of methodologies for conducting urban fieldwork  
   
   The module aims to provide an understanding of the evolution, and socio-economic, political, and cultural dynamics of the city of Berlin which will be visited on a weekly fieldcourse during the reading week in early November.   
   The module will be divided into two parts. The first section will include a series of lectures to provide some background in advance of the field course, while the second involves a five day field trip to Berlin. The module will build on foundation principles taught during Part I of the geography degree in pre-requisite modules. Students studying this module will be expected to develop a broad and critical understanding of the geographies of European cities and their regions, particularly Berlin, the different ways of conceptualising change, and of the importance of different scales of analysis.   
   The modules will be delivered entirely in Semester 1, students will be required to submit a six page essay on Berlin (excluding references) and a 5,000 word report or equivalent on the fieldcourse.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Geographies of Fashion and Food 
  
  
   This module covers a range of issues relating to the geographies of fashion and food. Topics covered include:  
   
    Commodity chains, global networks of supply and regulation   
    The embodied and material practices of food and fashion consumption   
    Branding, labelling, consumer knowledges and reflexive consumption   
    Commodity biographies, origins and the social life of things   
    Retail power, architecture and space   
    Theorising agency and value   
    Transforming, industrialising and globalising food   
    City foodscapes   
    Alternative food networks and food quality   
    Gender and food provisioning  
   
   This module aims to explore the economic geographies of fashion and food - two of the most global and yet most intimate and personal commodities. It explores the two sectors from a variety of scales and examines the contested conceptual bases of work on commodity chains, ethical systems of provision, retailing and exchange.  
   The module examines the geographies of production, employment, commodity movement, retailing, regulation and consumption of both fashion and food. We will be critically questioning who makes our food and clothes, where, how, why and under what conditions? Throughout we expect students to critically reflect on a range of geographical and other relevant literatures and to understand a variety of approaches to the topic.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Geographies of Money and Finance 
  
  
   This module aims to explore the economic geographies of money and of the contemporary processes of financialisation. Competing theories of money, and the changing landscapes of finance and the financial services industry are explored at a variety of spatial scales. Spaces examined include the global financial system, the UK retail financial market, the City of London and the emergence of local currency systems.  
   More specifically, the following core topics are covered:  
   
    The history and theory of money   
    Financial services and financial intermediation   
    Globalisation and the international financial system   
    The City of London as international financial centre   
    Landscapes of retail financial services   
    Alternative and imagined landscapes of money  
   
   This module aims to explore the economic geographies of money, finance and the financial services industry. It reveals the contested nature of knowledge about money and finance and in so doing it enables students to critically reflect on a range of geographical and other relevant literatures.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Geographies of Violence 
  
  
   This module will cover the following topics:  
   
    Political, historical, and cultural geographies of war   
    Spaces of internal violence and non-violence relating to colonialism, anti-colonialism, religious nationalism, and decolonisation/partition   
    Spaces of terrorism and the war against terror   
    Case studies from a variety of national and international contexts  
   
   The module aims to provide an understanding of the violent realities by which the geographies of the present and the past have been crafted. The three fundamental modes of violence that will be examined are war, colonialism, and terror. This violence will be traced not only in its materiality and technologies, but also in its geopolitical visions, rhetorical and epistemological categories, evolution, translatability, and mobility.  
   The more general aims will be pursued through detailed historical investigations of Britain, Continental Europe, the United States and India, and the post-9/11 world.  
   Students will benefit from being pushed to integrate theoretical, global and local studies. They will also be engaging with a revived and exciting sub-discipline of geography (geopolitics) whilst benefiting from an historical perspective on contemporary issues.  
   Students will learn how to interpret contemporary media reports, theoretical discussions, and methodological debates regarding the geographies of violence. These debates will contribute to the more general project of inducing a critical awareness of the contemporary environment, an historical understanding of contemporary geographies, and an appreciation of the contribution of technology and culture to processes of domination and resistance.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Geospatial Technologies: Mobile, Augmented and Virtual 
  
  
   This module focuses on the uptake of digital Geographic Information across a wide range of applications in society and the research agenda that is underpinning these developments. We will explore the use of location-aware mobile devices and techniques for geo-visualization that are visually immersive and interactive. Content is organised as follows:  
   Part I: Digital Geographic Information in the public domain  
   Here we consider how a convergence of technologies (positioning, communication and processing) has allowed digital geographic information to make an impact 'beyond the desktop' at both a global scale through the web, and at a personal scale via the mobile device. This includes Virtual Globes, 'open' and 'linked' geographic information, Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI), Location Based Services, and mobile geospatial apps.  
   Part II: Virtual Geographic Environments  
   Here we look at the role and impact of multi-dimensional geographic visualisation to support decision making, environmental impact assessment, and the communication of spatial context. This includes animation and 3D graphics, advances in data capture, urban and rural landscape visualisation, interaction design and immersion, Augmented and Virtual Realities.  
   The module aims to give students an understanding of the way digital Geographic Information is being used in the public domain, in particular in connection with location-aware mobile devices and multi-dimensional geo-visualization techniques.  
   The module encourages students to think critically about how geospatial technologies can be made to work effectively in these areas, and the research challenges that exist in terms of design and human computer interaction, and the way geography can work alongside other disciplines in this rapidly expanding field.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Global Climate Change 
  
  
   
    A review of modern climate systems and forcings  
    Climate modelling, projections of future climate change and their uncertainty  
    Controversies around climate change, the argument between believers and sceptics and the ways in which climate change is communicated to and perceived by the public   
    The impact of climate change on the world's physical and built environments, water and food resources, and human health  
    Mitigation and adaptation to future climate change including the role played by policy markers and NGOs  
   
   The aim of this module is to introduce students to the science and issues that surround present and future climate change and its impacts on human society and the natural environment. The module will cover the scientific basis for global climate change together with its impact on society, policy, mitigation and adaptation.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Quaternary Environments (Mexico Field Course) 
  
  
   This module considers the Quaternary evolution and settlement history of the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico, building explicitly on material covered in F82165 (Environmental Change). The focus of the course will be evolution of the present climate and environment of the lowland tropics and the interaction between the natural environment and human societies.  
   The module is based on a residential field trip to the Yucatan and project work associated with this. The main elements are:  
   
    An overview of climate dynamics in the tropics, with particular emphasis on changes in the monsoon, the impact of sea level change and drivers of change from mid-latitudes   
    Critical review of methods of environmental reconstruction and dating techniques   
    Archives of change relevant to the study area, primarily lakes and cave systems   
    Quaternary history of the Yucatan   
    Mesoamerican archaeology and cultural change in the Yucatan   
    Exploration of the possible role of climate in driving societal change  
   
   The aim of this module is to explore the nature of the Quaternary in different parts of the world and then to use the lowlands of the Yucatan peninsula to explore the relationship between climate, environment and society exploiting the region's unequalled archaeological record. There will be a particular focus on the period from the mid-Holocene, when the area was occupied by the Maya.   
  
 
     
  
 
   River Management and Restoration 
  
  
   This module further develops themes of river processes and dynamics introduced in module F82164 and considers them within the context of human attempts to manage and restore rivers. It initially centres on changes in the fluvial system that occur in response to river management and engineering and then goes on to examine approaches to restoring the natural functions of rivers that have been heavily degraded by human impacts.  
   The module includes reviews of past and present river channel restoration and rehabilitation activity in Europe and the USA. It details principles by which rehabilitation practice is guided, and introduces criteria for selection between rehabilitation strategies.  
   The module includes a residential field trip in semester one and a non-residential field trip in semester two, where students will have the opportunity to explore a range of river management and restoration issues relevant to rivers in the UK and develop practical skills in field survey and modelling techniques employed in contemporary river management.  
   The module aims for students to:  
   
    Appreciate recent developments in conservation-orientated river management  
    Stress the importance of retaining the physical integrity of river systems as the appropriate basis for sustainable river management  
    Raise awareness of the range, type and methods of river rehabilitation  
    Develop knowledge and critical evaluative skills to propose a rehabilitation design appropriate to a field-based example  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Scale and Diversity in the Canary Islands 
  
  
   The module involves study in Nottingham on secondary data relating to broad-scale patterns of diversity, endemism and evolution in the Canary Islands.  
   This module completes the biogeography pathway in the School of Geography. The broad aim of the module is to encourage students to apply knowledge, concepts and theoretical ideas studied in F81125 (Earth and Environmental Dynamics) and F82163/F82228/F82328 (Patterns of Life) at a range of spatial scales within a professional research context and to communicate research findings at a professional level.  
  
 
     
  
 
   The Cultural Geography of English Landscape 
  
  
   The module addresses issues of landscape and culture in England from the eighteenth century to the present day. Key themes throughout include landscape and national identity and relations of city and country. The module utilises sources including archives, literature, paintings, prints, poetry, maps, film and photography.  
   The first semester focuses on issues of landscape and Englishness since 1880. Topics covered include:  
   
    Tradition and modernism  
    Competing notions of heritage  
    The cultural politics of land  
    Questions of citizenship and the body  
   
   The second semester focuses on landscapes of Georgian England. Topics covered include:  
   
    Parks and gardens  
    Colonial landscapes  
    Agriculture  
    Industry and science  
    Towns  
    Transport and travel  
   
   Throughout the module the focus on landscape allows the exploration of key areas of cultural history. A one-day field trip to Derwent Valley is arranged, full costs will be provided nearer the time of the trip.  
   This module aims to examine the cultural geographies of English landscape since the eighteenth century through the use of a wide range of source materials.   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Geographical Imagination 
  
  
   This module will review the history of geography over the past three centuries to provide a deeper understanding of contemporary debates, and provide a cultural and historical analysis of the nature of geography as an academic subject and field of knowledge.  
   The first semester considers the emergence of geography as a self-consciously 'enlightened' 18th century science and reviews some of the factors that influenced its subsequent development, including cartography and mapping, exploration and field observation, evolutionary and early social scientific theories, the rise of civic education, national and imperial politics, radical and revolutionary ideas, and warfare and geopolitics.  
   The second semester focuses on the twentieth century to consider connections between field cultures and geographical knowledge, the visual cultures of geography, links between geography and Cold War politics, and ideas of geography as spatial science. Attention is given throughout to the biographies of key figures exercising the geographical imagination.  
   This module aims to provide students with a deeper understanding of the intellectual, social and political factors that have shaped the history of geography as a discipline.  
  
 
     
  
 
   The Landscape History of Liguria (Italy Field Course) 
  
  
   An interdisciplinary module which introduces the principles of historical ecology and landscape history, drawing on a wide range of sources including historical maps and documents, field survey of vegetation and landscape features and oral history using Liguria as a case study. This includes a field trip to Liguria, full costs will be supplied nearer the time of the trip.  
   Management, teamwork and communications skills will be developed through group project work and the oral presentation of these findings on the residential field trip. Analytical writing and research skills will be developed in the interim essay and final project report.  
   This module will deliver:  
   
    A broad understanding of the main issues and concerns in landscape history  
    An understanding of the applied historical geography  
    An understanding of historical ecology