Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  Typical year one modules  
  Core  
 
   Approaches to Contemporary Chinese Studies 
  
  
   This is an introductory course designed to provide students with appropriate study skills, familiarity with resources, an understanding of the methodological approaches used in studying contemporary China, to develop students' understanding of how to use critical approaches to study all aspects of contemporary Chinese society.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    develop students' ability to find and utilise relevant empirical materials   
    develop students' intellectual and transferable vocational skills   
    develop e-learning skills  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Contemporary China 
  
  
   This is an introductory course designed to provide students with an overview of contemporary China and help students establish a foundation of knowledge and skills to pursue more advanced studies of China in their later years of study. The module examines the following topics since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, though particular attention is paid to the changes in China since 1978.  
   On completion of this module, students will:  
   
    have a basic knowledge of political, economic, social and environmental developments in contemporary China   
    be familiar with theoretical debates regarding issues in contemporary China and differing empirical approaches to studying the nature of changes in contemporary China   
    be able to comment in an informed, critical manner on contemporary issues and developments   
    have improved their capacity to conduct research on contemporary China  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Mandarin Chinese for Beginners 
  
  
   Mandarin modules are available from beginners’ (Level 1) to research (Level 5). Students are assessed and placed at the appropriate level of study.   
   Please note: Native speakers of Mandarin will take Advanced English for Disciplinary Study modules instead of Mandarin.  
   This module provide students with the knowledge of Chinese phonetics, grammar, vocabulary and cultural information in order to develop their competence in Mandarin Chinese. The focus is on communicative competence in both spoken and written language. The script of Mandarin Chinese is taught to make sure that students on the course are not disadvantaged by their written language.  
   The overall aim of the module is provide students with the phonetic and basic grammatical knowledge and develop a competence in Mandarin Chinese in spoken and written language.  
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   Chinese Society and Economy 
  
  
   This module emphasises sociological theories of family and society with reference to China. Topics include:  
   
    Political and social structure of China: the State, society, families and individuals   
    Trust, Guanxi (social relations), and social capital   
    Rural-urban divide: dualism, 'urban bias' or 'State bias'   
    Nationhood, identity and ethnicity   
    Health, education and aspirations  
   
   The aim of this module is to provide an introduction to the socio-economic aspects of China. The module objectives are to develop an understanding of contemporary Chinese society, its social structures and the effects of economic reform upon these, and to generate a familiarity with the main sources of information concerning China.   
   Students will apply relevant theoretical frameworks to the analysis of social issues in contemporary China and analyse evidence on these issues.  
  
 
     
  
 
   East Asian Business in the Twentieth Century 
  
  
   In view of the impact East Asian business has had on world business and trading patterns in recent decades, it is important to understand how business has evolved in the region. This module provides the historical background to key developments in East Asian business, including:  
   
    The history of Western business in Asia from colonial times to the post-Second World War period   
    The economic, political and social background to business development in key countries in the region   
    The emergence of Japan as Asia's first industrialized nation, the 'Economic Miracle' and development of the 'Japan, Inc.' model   
    The development paths of East Asia's newly industrialized countries (NICs) from colonial rule into the 1980s China's post-1978 economic growth and business development   
    The 1997 Asian financial crisis Business organisation, industrial groups, and industrial relations in East Asia  
   
   This module aims to assess the reasons why industrial capitalism developed in East Asian economies, as well as to analyse how it was adapted to local circumstances. As well as the major economies like Japan, China, and South Korea, insights will also be gained into smaller countries like Malaysia, Indonesia, and Hong Kong. Time will also be devoted to the Chinese diaspora and the development of Chinese and other transnational business groups in the East Asian region.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Foundations for Politics and International Relations 
  
  
  
    This module introduces students to the intellectual and practical skills they will need for the successful study of politics. These include: 
   
   
    
     critical awareness of sources  
     developing effective arguments  
     note-taking and efficient reading  
     using the library and searching for resources  
     effective interpretation and presentation of data  
     essay writing  
     presentation skills     
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
     develop the practical and intellectual skills that students need to successfully study politics.     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Business and Economy of Contemporary China 
  
  
   This module intends to provide the fundamental knowledge of China's economic transformation and business development. It assists students to establish an understanding of issues including economic strategies, industrial sector transformation, investment, trade and business management.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    provide an introductory programme that facilitates students learning in the disciplines of Management, Economics and Chinese Studies  
    introduce to students theoretical debates and empirical materials that are used in explaining business-related issues  
    familiarize students with comparative perspectives on business practices generally, and Chinese business practices specifically  
    practise and develop students' intellectual and transferable vocational skills   
    foster students' awareness with economic issues, policies and institutions of China  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Modern Political Theory 
  
  
  
    This module introduces students to the ideas of some of the canonical thinkers in the history of political thought, such as Burke, Rousseau, Kant, Mill, and Marx.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module considers the impact of these thinkers on modern political thought and practice, with reference to key political ideas and historical developments (such as liberty and equality, and the Enlightenment). The course will be text based.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to provide knowledge of: 
   
   
    
    
     the history of western political thought  
     some central issues and debates of political philosophy  
     the contexts in which the various thinkers wrote  
     the principal arguments of their canonical texts   
     their analysis of key ideas such as property, liberty, the role of the state etc      
    
   
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year two modules  
  Core modules in China  
 
   Intermediate Mandarin 
  
  
   Mandarin modules are available from beginners’ (Level 1) to research (Level 5). Students are assessed and placed at the appropriate level of study.   
   Please note: Native speakers of Mandarin will take Advanced English for Disciplinary Study modules instead of Mandarin.  
   This module concentrates on revising the basic skills acquired during previous study and aims to further develop students' oral and written communicative ability in the Mandarin Chinese language in more complex situations. The Mandarin Chinese language will be used as much as possible in class.  
   The overall aim of the module is to produce students who develop further competence in the four skills of the Mandarin Chinese language: listening, speaking, reading and writing, together with more complex grammatical structures.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Techniques in Contemporary Chinese Studies 
  
  
   How do researchers plan and deliver research projects? What are some of the ethical and practical considerations central to carrying out research? How do students start to become researchers in the China field? This module will address these questions by developing students’ skills, knowledge and understanding of a range of research methods and fieldwork techniques in the Chinese context.   
   Topics for this module cover research design and strategies, case studies, semi-structured interviews, content & discourse analysis, risk assessment, safety and ethical issues, group and individual research projects.  
   Students will undertake practical fieldwork activities while based at The University of Nottingham campus in Ningbo. Seminar contact hours will comprise of student-led teaching sessions, small group and/or individual tutorials, and fieldwork trips. Where possible, students of Chinese language programmes will be encouraged to apply their nascent Chinese language skills to research tasks. Relevant fieldwork, information gathering and recording, writing and presentation skills will also be developed and enhanced.  
   The aims of this module are to:  
   
    develop awareness and understanding of a range of research methods and fieldwork techniques in China  
    enable students to plan and undertake research activities in a field setting in China  
    provide guidance in the development of safety, ethical and cross-cultural considerations associated with research and fieldwork investigations  
    introduce skills of information collection and synthesis, and develop the ability to evaluate the significance and relevance of information  
    enable students to locate and handle a variety of primary source materials together with other relevant data, and to construct a bibliography of secondary sources  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Rise of Modern China 
  
  
   This module covers the history of China from the 1840s, through to the establishment of the People's Republic in 1949. It looks at social, cultural, political and economic developments in this period from a variety of angles and approaches.  
   The module focuses in particular on the ways in which Chinese society responded to the arrival of 'modernity' in the form of the Western powers and Japan throughout the period in question, but also how different groups in China tried to remould or redefine China as a 'modern' nation-state and society.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    develop students' understanding of the major events and processes which shaped Chinese society between1840 and 1949   
    enhance students' understanding of historiographical debates around the subject   
    practise and develop students' intellectual and transferable skills  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional modules in China  
 
   Chinese Society and Economy 
  
  
   This module emphasises sociological theories of family and society with reference to China. Topics include:  
   
    Political and social structure of China: the State, society, families and individuals   
    Trust, Guanxi (social relations), and social capital   
    Rural-urban divide: dualism, 'urban bias' or 'State bias'   
    Nationhood, identity and ethnicity   
    Health, education and aspirations  
   
   The aim of this module is to provide an introduction to the socio-economic aspects of China. The module objectives are to develop an understanding of contemporary Chinese society, its social structures and the effects of economic reform upon these, and to generate a familiarity with the main sources of information concerning China.   
   Students will apply relevant theoretical frameworks to the analysis of social issues in contemporary China and analyse evidence on these issues.  
  
 
     
  
 
   International Political Economy 
  
  
   This module introduces students to the major topics in China's interaction with and role in international political economy (IPE). It includes useful concepts and theories in IPE, the evolution of China’s ties with international political economy since 1949, the linkage between domestic and international political economy of China and players in the making of external political economic policies in China.  
   It also examines China's role in international economic regimes (such as the WTO) and in the global and regional orders of political economy. It provides a survey of the political economy of China’s ties with the major powers and regions such as the US, East Asia, and major oil producing nations.  
   This module aims at enabling students to develop an understanding of the role China plays in international political economy and think critically issues related to this topic.  
  
 
     
  
 
   The Politics of Development 
  
  
   This module will look at theories and experiences of economic development. It will address the sociological, political and ethical questions related to modernisation and compare different theoretical approaches to development. It will furthermore consider the practical problems arising from development management and organisation and take the role of international organisations, NGOs and state actors under close scrutiny.  
   The aim of this module is to introduce student of international studies to the issue area of global development politics and to problems of economic and socio-political development (modernisation).  
  
 
     
  
  
  Core modules in Nottingham  
 
   The Rise of Modern China 
  
  
   This module covers the history of China from the 1840s, through to the establishment of the People's Republic in 1949. It looks at social, cultural, political and economic developments in this period from a variety of angles and approaches.  
   The module focuses in particular on the ways in which Chinese society responded to the arrival of 'modernity' in the form of the Western powers and Japan throughout the period in question, but also how different groups in China tried to remould or redefine China as a 'modern' nation-state and society.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    develop students' understanding of the major events and processes which shaped Chinese society between1840 and 1949   
    enhance students' understanding of historiographical debates around the subject   
    practise and develop students' intellectual and transferable skills  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional modules in Nottingham  
 
   Approaches to Politics and International Relations 
  
  
  
    The module introduces students to alternative theoretical approaches to the study of political phenomena.  
   
   
    
   
  
    We consider the different forms of analysing, explaining, and understanding politics associated with approaches such as: 
   
   
    
    
     behaviouralism  
     rational choice theory  
     institutionalism  
     Marxism  
     feminism  
     interpretive theory   
     post-modernism  
    
   
  
    The module shows that the different approaches are based upon contrasting ‘ontological’ suppositions about the nature of politics, and they invoke alternative ‘epistemological’ assumptions about how we acquire valid knowledge of politics and international relations.  
   
   
    
   
  
    We examine questions such as:  
   
   
    
    
     what constitutes valid knowledge in political science and international relations?   
     should political science methodology be the same as the methods employed in the natural sciences?   
     can we give causal explanations of social and political phenomena?   
     can we ever be objective in our analysis?   
     what is the relationship between knowledge and power?   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Chinese Society and Economy 
  
  
   This module emphasises sociological theories of family and society with reference to China. Topics include:  
   
    Political and social structure of China: the State, society, families and individuals   
    Trust, Guanxi (social relations), and social capital   
    Rural-urban divide: dualism, 'urban bias' or 'State bias'   
    Nationhood, identity and ethnicity   
    Health, education and aspirations  
   
   The aim of this module is to provide an introduction to the socio-economic aspects of China. The module objectives are to develop an understanding of contemporary Chinese society, its social structures and the effects of economic reform upon these, and to generate a familiarity with the main sources of information concerning China.   
   Students will apply relevant theoretical frameworks to the analysis of social issues in contemporary China and analyse evidence on these issues.  
  
 
     
  
 
   East Asian Business in the Global Economy 
  
  
   The organisation and globalisation of business in the major economies of East Asia will be examined. Focusing on Japan, China and Korea, it will be possible to identify characteristic features of East Asian business systems, the internationalisation of various types of business systems and the trajectories of interaction between East Asian and north Atlantic businesses.  
   This module is aimed principally at assessing the interactions between East Asian Business and the global economy. Building on the first semester module that outlines the evolution of East Asian business systems, this module will contextualise these developments and link them with recent trends associated with globalisation.  
   Students will become familiar with the nature of East Asian business, how East Asian economies have fared over the last 20 years, and the influence of 'collective management' practices on European and American business and organisations. They will also be able to judge the extent to which convergence has become a major force in world business over the last 20 years.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Social Change and Public Policy in China's Reform Era 
  
  
   Students will learn how the Chinese central government has responded to socio-economic changes by issuing a number of key policy initiatives, most notably in the field of social security, health, education, labour, innovation and the environment. In the first part of the module participants will be sensitized about the interplay between socio-economic transformation, administrative reform and public policy making during China's reform era (1978-). Students will gain a deeper understanding how new government functions contribute to innovations in public sector management.  
   Drawing both on primary and secondary sources students will familiarise themselves with the increasingly lively domestic debates among social and political scientists, educators, media professionals, civil society practitioners, government officials and lawyers about goals and means of China's modernisation drive. In the second part of the module students will learn about the expanded spaces for participatory policy making in China by analysing case studies in all five substantive policy fields.  
   Students will be enabled to acquire the necessary theoretical and practical skills to analyse public policies in China. They will be encouraged to think critically about policy models and contrast them with evolving practices of public policy making in China.  
   Participants will gain a better understanding of the scale of social change in China, learn about the value of participatory policy making, and through small and big group deliberations and action will internalise a culture of collaboration by developing group presentations on selected public policies.  
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year three modules  
  Core  
 
   Government and Politics of Taiwan and Hong Kong 
  
  
   This module introduces students to the nature and driving forces for politics and for development in the two most important Chinese societies that followed paths different from that adopted on the Chinese mainland under the leadership of the Communist Party.  
   This module aims at stimulating students to think critically about the uniqueness of China, its people, tradition and politics. It is best taken by students who have already studied the politics and society of the PRC. They will be required to reflect critically on the significance and the implications of Taiwan and Hong Kong having followed alternative approaches successfully.  
  
 
     
  
 
   International Political Economy of China 
  
  
   This module introduces students to the major topics in China's interaction with and role in international political economy (IPE). It includes useful concepts and theories in IPE, the evolution of China’s ties with international political economy since 1949, the linkage between domestic and international political economy of China and players in the making of external political economic policies in China.  
   It also examines China's role in international economic regimes (such as the WTO) and in the global and regional orders of political economy. It provides a survey of the political economy of China’s ties with the major powers and regions such as the US, East Asia, and major oil producing nations.  
   This module aims at enabling students to develop an understanding of the role China plays in international political economy and think critically issues related to this topic.  
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   China's Political Economy 
  
  
   This module examines the interaction between politics and economy in China during the economic reform period from 1978 onward. Particular attention will be given to the progress and periods of China's reform, the political context of major economic policies, reform of major aspects of the economy, evolution of economic institutions, as well as an overview of economic development in China prior to 1978.  
   The module will highlight the role of the political factors and state policies in China’s economy, which is important for a good understanding of the reform and economic development in China.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    enhance students' understanding of the relationship between politics and economics in contemporary China and how politics affects economic policies in China   
    familiarize students with debates and empirical materials that are used in explaining changes in China's political economy   
    provide a programme that facilitates progressive learning in the disciplines of Political Economy and Chinese Studies   
    foster students' cultural awareness and understanding of a populous developing nation and economy   
    provide a programme that facilitates students' progressive learning in the disciplines of Political Economy and Chinese Studies  
    enhance students' understanding of the theoretical debates and empirical materials that are used in explaining the inter-relationship of politics and economics in contemporary China   
    practise and develop students' intellectual and transferable vocational skills   
    foster students' cultural awareness  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Chinese Film and Literature 
  
  
   The module examines the close linkage between literature and cinema in China. It also explores trends in modern Chinese cinema and literature, with a primary focus on different genres and themes developed since 1978. By placing Chinese cinema and literature within their cultural, social and historical contexts, students will analyse, interpret and appreciate such phenomena.  
   It will include analyses of individual texts in translation and films with English subtitles. The module requires students to view films in English subtitles each week. It will increase students' awareness of the major developments in literature and film as they are embedded in the wider changes in modern China.  
   The module leads students to examine the shifting socio-political and cultural landscape in mainland China in the 20th and 21st centuries through the lens of film and literature.  
   Crossing disciplinary boundaries including film studies, cultural studies, media studies and sinology, students will not only gain a knowledge of key issues and events in modern and contemporary Chinese history and society, but also of approaches to understanding and appreciating literary and cinematic texts.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Mandarin Chinese for the Advanced Level 
  
  
   Mandarin modules are available from beginners’ (Level 1) to research (Level 5). Students are assessed and placed at the appropriate level of study.   
   Please note: Native speakers of Mandarin will take Advanced English for Disciplinary Study modules instead of Mandarin.  
   Module content is as follows:  
   
    Studies on accuracy of grammar on times and changes, and connectors and discourse markers in spoken and written Chinese  
    Vocabulary related to physical features, personalities, human social behaviours, economic developments and basic statistics   
    Language functions for relating experiences, describing physical features, making generalisations, defining historic personalities and celebrities and describing changes, etc.   
   
   The aim of this module is to build on the practical language experiences gained previously, to consolidate and extend vocabulary, to increase comprehension, to reinforce grammatical accuracy and to develop a fluent command of written and spoken Mandarin Chinese.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Media and Communications in Globalising China 
  
  
   Media systems are critically important in any modern political system, and this module leads students directly to the heart of understanding how the media relates to contemporary society and politics in the People's Republic of China. It introduces students to the unprecedented transformation in contemporary Chinese media and communication in the context of economic reforms, development of new media technologies and globalisation.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    demonstrate to the students that Chinese media embodies a tense negotiation site between official ideologies and the market, the Party and state and the society, propaganda and commerce   
    foster students' awareness of the relationships between the Party-state and the society, intensified by powers brought by commercialisation, globalisation and new media   
    introduce students to the key changes in media and communications embedded in the rapidly changing political, economic and globalising contexts since 1978   
    develop students' understanding of the debate between media and democracy and their ability to handle relevant empirical materials   
    practise and develop students' intellectual and transferable vocational skills  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Politics of East Asia 
  
  
  
    This module affords an understanding of the linkage between international and domestic politics in East Asia.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module is divided into three parts: 
   
   
    
    
     The first part offers conceptual and historical perspectives that enable one to analyse how international and domestic politics relate to each other.  
     The second part focuses on China and Japan, and examines their domestic transformation and foreign policy development in the post-cold war period.   
     The third part focuses on key issues of the region, and examines how those issues affect domestic transformation of East Asian states, and in turn, how the domestic transformation affects those issues.   
    
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     enable students to identify and discuss conceptual and historical perspectives found in the literature on the politics of East Asia  
     explore ways to analyse the links between global and domestic politics in East Asia and how they relate to the conceptual and historical perspectives in the literature  
     develop a framework of enquiry within which students can construct subject-related knowledge and relevant research skills   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Religion in Modern China 
  
  
   This module will introduce students to Chinese religion as a social phenomenon, and provide an overview of the officially-recognised belief systems comprising China's religious landscape. It will examine the doctrines, practices and institutions of different religious groups, while also considering the unofficial traditions that play an important role in modern Chinese religiosity.  
   Major topics covered include:  
   
    Buddhism, Daoism, Islam, Protestantism and Christianity in China   
    Folk belief and new religious movements (NRMs)   
    China's ongoing Confucian revival   
    Policies affecting the governance of religion, and their history, in China   
    The political dimension of religion in China  
   
   In this module, students will gain a nuanced understanding of religion in modern China and its relation to politics and society at large. Through lectures, seminars and analysis of the news-cycle, students will develop informed perspectives on the various issues affecting Chinese religious belief and practice. This will, in turn, inform their broader understanding of Chinese culture, society and its recent history.  
  
 
     
  
 
   The Rights and Wrongs of Climate Change 
  
  
  
    What should the world do about climate change? How should we proceed in the face of persistent claims that it won't do serious harm, or isn't occurring at all?  
   
   
    
   
  
    Should poor countries as well as rich ones be obliged to cut their carbon emissions? Is it wrong for individuals to fly? What if you offset your flight? How much weight should we accord harm that may come many years in the future?  
   
   
    
   
  
    Arguments about climate change raise many of the most controversial issues in contemporary ethics and political theory. This module will examine these debates and the broader questions they hinge on. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     familiarise students with some of the key debates surrounding climate change  
     expand students' knowledge of moral philosophy, political theory and environmental ethics   
    
   
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year four modules  
  Core  
 
   China and the World 
  
  
   This module introduces students to the traditional Chinese and the Maoist world views, though it focusses on the changes that have taken place since the start of the reform period. It explores how domestic politics and other developments have contributed on the one hand to the rise of China as a great power of the first league and to the emergence of a 19th century European type of nationalism on the other.   
   It addresses China's use of force in support of foreign policy as well as its attempts to project soft power. It also reviews China' relations with its major partners or competitors, including the USA, the EU (including the UK), and the importance of Taiwan in China's relations with the rest of the world.  
   This module aims at stimulating students to think critically about what is the rightful place for China in the modern world, including why such a question still needs to be raised for a great power that holds the veto at the UN Security Council. It is best taken by students who enjoy questioning what have been widely taken for granted.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Dissertation 
  
  
   This is an individual dissertation project based on a Chinese studies topic to be agreed by the candidate and the dissertation tutor (module convenor) and specialist supervisor.  
   The module aims to:  
   
    develop skills of problem recognition and definition  
    raise awareness of and responding to the ethical issues related to gathering data  
    implement risk assessment skills related to fieldwork and developing a culture of safety and appropriate research practices  
    have the opportunity to develop and apply research design and investigation skills in a field-based environment  
    enhance skills of information collection and synthesis, and the ability to evaluate the significance and relevance of information  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   Chinese Economic Issues 
  
  
   This module introduces students to different hot topics and cutting-edge research on Chinese economy, and offers a platform for allowing postgraduate students to connect with experts in the field. Topics vary across the years, including but not limited to China’s economic growth, investment and trade, foreign direct investment, the financial and banking reform; science, technology and innovation; regional inequality; business management.  
   The module aims to develop students' knowledge and understanding of key economic issues in China in an era of rapid development and change. It complements other compulsory and optional modules available on China’s management and business, politics, law, culture and society, and history.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Contemporary Chinese Culture and Society 
  
  
   This modules introduces students to key concepts in the understanding of contemporary Chinese culture and features of Chinese society, including:   
   
    Continuity and change in the Chinese family  
    Rural and urban society  
    Chinese youth and generational identity  
    Ethnicity and religion in contemporary China  
    The arts and popular culture  
   
   The module aims to develop students' knowledge and understanding of continuity and change in China’s society and culture during the reform era. It complements other taught-postgraduate modules on China’s contemporary history, politics, law, economic development, and business.  
  
 
     
  
 
   EU-China: Trade, Aid and Public Diplomacy in the 21st Century 
  
  
   Participants will learn about the state-of-the-art of western engagement with China during the past 35 years (1978-), in particular western trade and development policies towards China and gain insights into the interplay between bilateral and multilateral development agencies and Chinese domestic partner organisations. Participants learn to critique emerging partnerships between international NGOs and domestic civil society organisations and academic institutions.   
   Drawing both on primary and secondary sources participants will familiarize themselves with the increasingly lively international debates among Chinese and non-Chinese social and political scientists, educators, media professionals, civil society practitioners, government officials, and lawyers about goals and means of western China engagement. This optional module will provide a socially relevant policy curriculum and help students develop necessary skills for a democratic practice of public policy inquiry.  
   Domestic and international students will be enabled to acquire the necessary theoretical and practical skills to analyze western engagement with China. They will be encouraged to think critically about the modalities of western development aid and trade policies towards China.  
   Participants will gain a better understanding of the scale of European partnerships with China, learn about the value of transparency and accountability in international relations and public diplomacy, and through small and big group deliberations and action will internalize a culture of collaboration by developing small group presentations on selected issues covered in this module.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Europe and the Developing World 
  
  
   This module analyses the decision-making process and current policy issues in both economic (first pillar) and political and security (CFSP: Common Foreign and Security Policies, and ESDP: European Security and Defence Policies) policies within the European Union. We will examine theories, concepts and case studies to explain the nature of contemporary EU policies towards Africa, the Middle East and Asia.   
   The module aims to:  
   
    promote a critical engagement with material in the International Relations and European Foreign Policy field  
    provide an insight into the link between theory and practice of security policies  
    provide an understanding of how the European Union reacts to international crises  
    provide a basis for further study or careers in government, international organisations, media and the military  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Human Resource Management and Industrial Relations in China 
  
  
   The module aims to develop students' knowledge and understanding of the theory and practice of HRM and industrial relations in China during the reform era across enterprises in all ownership sectors.   
   HRM is a crucial element of industrial relations, by providing the students sound understanding of theory concerning collective relationship between employees and employers, and the role of union and non-union in representation of employees through the examination of practical issues such as collective bargaining, grievance, and industrial actions.  
   This module aims to provide students generic understanding of main elements in industrial relations, from employee/employer relationship to government/business relationship, then more broadly, to the dynamic interaction between local state and society. Within industrial relations, the HRM is a crucial part so the module will also introduce the practice and operation of HRM.   
   This module pays specific attention on the China market, especially the state/market relationship after 1978 economic reform.  
  
 
     
  
 
   International Development: China, Asia, Africa 
  
  
   This module examines challenges facing China and the main developing regions in the world, i.e most parts of Asia and Africa. It looks at international agencies such as the United Nations, the World Bank and the IMF, and North-South and South-South collaborations in promoting socioeconomic developments in the low-income countries; It also introduces methods of cross-country comparative analysis, examines development models from an international perspective; and evaluates socio-economic policies in different regions at both macro and micro levels.  
   This module aims to provide students with research-led teaching on the issues of international development, North-South and South-South cooperation, and the inter-linkage between economic development and social and human developments; it will lead students to examine these issues with theories and perspectives in economics, sociology, political science, and cultural studies; it will assist students in obtaining an in-depth and evidence-based understanding of international policy-making; and to familiarise students with the different strategic public or social policies adopted by a variety of countries with different political systems, social structures and economic mechanisms.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Law, Market and Society in China 
  
  
   The lecture/seminar examines legal developments in China in the context of China's construction of a market economy and of China's participation into globalization since 1978. It focuses on particular aspects of legal development in China's making of a market economy. Based upon social-legal theoretical frameworks it aims to evaluate the transformation of the relationship among the state, law and market economy in China.  
   The module aims to develop students' knowledge and understanding of the relationships among state, law and market economy of China in the reform era. It complements other taught-postgraduate modules on China’s management and business, history, politics, economic development, and culture and society.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Marketing Management in China and Emerging Markets 
  
  
   The module covers the following main topics:  
   
    Understanding marketing management in China and emerging markets  
    Capturing marketing insights  
    Connecting with customers  
    Building strong brands  
    Shaping the market offerings  
    Delivering value  
    Communicating value  
    Creating successful long-term growth   
   
   The module aims to develop students' knowledge and understanding of the theory and practice of marketing management in China and emerging markets.  
  
 
     
  
 
   The Theory and Practice of Diplomacy 
  
  
   This module focuses on the changing nature of diplomatic practice, together with the range of conceptual tools that seek to explain this international activity. Its focus is contemporary. It provides a political analysis of new developments such as the public diplomacy, the decline of resident embassies and foreign ministries, and the role of regional/multinational organisations and summitry. It also encourages students to consider future theoretical and practical developments in this field.  
   The module is linked to the research interests of the three members of staff who will deliver this module. It offers an advanced study of ther theory and practice of current diplomacy. It will deal with core issues of diplomatic technique in part 1 and contemporary issues of diplomacy in part 2.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Theories and Concepts in International Relations 
  
  
   The War on Iraq and the US and British invasion of the country in 2003 has led to huge tensions in geopolitics. At the same time, the supposed 'threat' of international terrorism and continuing financial turmoil in the world economy have both brought to the fore the global politics of co-operation and confrontation. Whilst it might be possible to agree on the signifcance of these events, the explanation and/or understanding of them is dependent on prior theoretical choices. The purpose of this module is to make students aware of the diversity of approaches to international theory.   
   The overall aim of the module is to provide students with a solid theoretical and conceptual grounding of this diversity. The module aims to:  
   
    familiarise students with the contemporary literature and debates  
    establish competence in a variety of approaches  
    appreciate the strengths and weaknesses of competing approaches  
    develop an understanding of how key concepts are conceived and applied in international relations  
    develop a critical comparison of the application of the dominant explanatory models  
    understand the reasons for the use of specific approaches  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   War, Peace and Terror 
  
  
   This module explores the blurring boundaries between war and peace, and the implications for understanding security. The first section assesses the changing nature of warfare, including theories of asymmetric warfare and terrorism; the second section examines the ‘dark arts’ of international relations, from assassination to psychological warfare, operating in the grey area between war and peace. With large scale conventional warfare increasingly unlikely, the third section considers ‘new’ security issues in peacetime such as poverty and disease.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    give students critical understanding of the blurring boundaries between war and peace in the modern world  
    introduce students to a range of issues, from terrorism to covert action, which are increasingly challenging conventional distinctions between war and peace  
    introduce students to theories of war, peace, and security and impart an awareness of how the ‘security’ agenda of states and societies is changing