Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer.  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   
  Compulsory 
   
  
    Studying the Greek World 
   
  
    This wide-ranging module introduces you to the history, literature and art of the Greek World from 1600BC-31BC; the period from the Bronze Age to 
   the point when Greece becomes part of the Roman Empire; no prior knowledge of the Greek world is required. You will also consider other major  
   chapters of Greece’s history from the Mycenean Period and the Dark Ages, to the rise of the polis in the Archaic period. You will also explore  
   developments in Greek literary and artistic culture as well as consider aspects of the reception of ancient Greece in modern western culture. For  
   this module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week over the course of 10 weeks.  
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Studying the Roman World 
   
  
    This module introduces you to the history, literature and art of the Roman world from the beginnings of the city of Rome to the fall of the Roman 
   Empire in the West. You will examine many important aspects of Rome’s history such as the Roman Republic, the rise of the empire, the  
    
    establishment of the Principate, and the fall of Rome. At the same time you will explore developments in Roman literary and artistic culture, and  
    consider aspects of the reception of ancient Rome in modern western culture. In addition, you will also examine the relationship of the Roman  
    world to the Greek world which complements the Autumn semester module ‘Studying the Greek World'. For this module you will have one 2-hour  
    lecture each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Interpreting Ancient History
    
   
   
   This module takes you through some of the important historical issues from major periods of Greek and Roman history with an emphasis on the methodological questions raised from ancient source materials and modern debates on those issues. On completion of this module you wll have a more detailed knowledge of these important historical issues and clearly understand the evidential basis on which ancient historians rely, as well as an appreciation of how contemporary preoccupations can influence the perspectives of modern practitioners of the discipline and generate debate between them.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Understanding the Past – Introduction to Archaeology  
   
  
    This module will provide you with an introduction to archaeology as a discipline. It covers the development of the subject and examines methods for discovering, recovering and analysing archaeological remains. Archaeological prospection/survey, excavation, post-survey/excavation analysis, approaches to dating, materials analysis and an introduction to frameworks of social interpretation are all themes addressed within the module, which also introduces some of the key practical skills for archaeology. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures, seminars, practical classes, and computer workshops on average taking up about 2 hours per week across a full year.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Forests to Farmers: Prehistoric Archaeology of Britain  
   
  
    This module provides an overview of the archaeology of the British Isles from the earliest traces of human activity until the Roman invasion of Britain. It will introduce students to key concepts in prehistoric archaeology through study of the major archaeological finds and sites of the period from henges to the hillforts of Wessex. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 4 hours per week across the autumn semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Rome to Revolution: Historical Archaeology of Britain  
   
  
    This module provides students with an overview of the archaeology of the British Isles from the Roman invasion until the industrial revolution. Using key sites and discoveries, students will be introduced to the challenges of understanding the archaeology of periods partially documented in textual sources. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 4 hours per week across the spring semester. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Optional  
  
    Interpreting Ancient Art 
   
  
    In this module you will explore Greek and Roman art in more detail with the aim of gaining a broad overview of visual material from classical  
    
    antiquity, whilst concentrating on a cross-section of the most famous and talked-about objects and monuments of Greek and Roman culture. You will  
    be introduced to temple-sculpture, statues, wall-paintings, buildings and coins from the 6th Century BC Greek sculptures to the 4th Century AD  
    arch of Constantine in Rome. Material for this module is organised by theme and media rather than in chronological order, starting with  
    topography, sculpture and vase painting. For this module you will have two 1-hour lectures each week and five 2-hour seminars over the course of  
    your first year.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Intepreting Ancient Literature 
   
   
    Ancient literature from Homer to late antiquity is studied in this module by focusing on a representative theme. Themes will address issues such as the relationship between literature and society, the working of genres, modern and ancient receptions, the analysis of rhetoric, and literary style. Recent themes have included ‘Performance and Persuasion’ and 'Love and War'; some issues treated may include: orality and performance, genre, gender, religion and literature, ritual and performance. For this module you will have eight 1-hour seminars over the year and two 1-hour lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Extended Source Study 
   
  
    This module is designed to develop your skills of research, analysis and written presentation as preparation for your third year dissertation.  
    
    You will be expected to write a 5,000 word essay chosen from a range of worksheet topics, each focusing on a single piece of ancient source 
     
    
    
    material. You will be provided with a topic for investigation, starter bibliography and tips on how to approach the question. The questions will  
    suggest a range of possible approaches from evaluation of historical source material to exploration of literary effects, relationships with other  
    material, discussion of context or reception. A number of seminars and consultation sessions will be help you approach and develop your source  
    study. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one 2-hour seminar over a period of 10 weeks. 
    
    
      
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Archaeological Research: Theory and Practice 
   
   
    This module is aimed at helping students to develop more advanced research skills and to discover the methods that are used in major archaeological research projects. In particular students will be introduced to the research methods that they will put into practice in their third year dissertation or independent project. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Independent Second Year Project  
   
   
    This module is your opportunity to expand your knowledge of the Classical world in an area which interests you, and to experiment with a method of communicating that knowledge which is different from the usual assessment practices of essay-writing, exam-writing and seminar-presentation. You might undertake research that leads to (for example) the construction of a database, or to the reconstruction of some ancient Greco-Roman artefact. You might acquire experience of a communication method which could be of use to you in a future career, e.g. by constructing a teaching plan, writing in a journalistic style, planning a museum exhibit. You might choose to experiment with a different medium of communication, e.g. video, website. The topic and form of the project chosen must both be approved by the module convenor.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Studying Classical Scholarship 
   
   
    A partner module to Q82ESS (Extended Source Study), which focused on primary ancient source material, this module focuses on the history and development of scholarship on ancient Greece and Rome and on specific scholarly theories, approaches and methods. The module is assessed principally by a 4500-5000 word essay based on one of a number of worksheets ('Scholarship Case Studies'), which explore the place and significance of a particular work of modern scholarship in academic approaches to a given topic in ancient art, history or literature. Studying this work in its socio-political context and the merits and limitations of its scholarly approach will develop your skills of research and analysis, as preparation for your 3rd-year dissertation. The worksheets will change each year depending on the staff involved. They may cover themes such as Race; Gender; Sexuality; Slavery; approaches such as Marxist, Fascist or liberal democratic interpretations of the Ancient World; topics such as Athenian democracy, Sparta, or the decline of Rome; or analytical methods such as Commentaries, Translation, Comparison or Anthropological Paradigms. For your worksheet, you will be provided with a topic for investigation, a starter bibliography and tips on how to approach the question. A number of seminars and consultation sessions will be held in order to help you approach and develop your study. At one of the seminars you will give an assessed oral presentation on an aspect of the worksheet.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Constantine 
   
  
    The emperor Constantine (306-337) is regarded as the Roman emperor with the most significant long-term impact.This is partly based on the  
    
    foundation of his city, Constantinople, as well as his decision to give his support to Christians who were a religious minority at the time. This 
     
    
    
    module aims to try to understand the reasons behind these important decisions of Constantine's, and to place his reign in its wider context - the  
    turmoil experienced by the Roman Empire during the third century, the recovery of stability under the emperor Diocletian and the Tetrarchy, the  
    emergence of the Christian church as a significant feature of the empire's religious landscape, and the new military challenges which the empire  
    faced in the form of Persia and northern barbarian groups. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture each week and one 1-hour seminar  
    each fortnight.
     
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Classics and Popular Culture 
   
  
    For this module you will explore the reception of ancient Greek and Roman culture in modern popular media such as films, novels, museums,  
   architecture, children’s literature and comics with the aim of understanding how these receptions influence the way Greek and Roman culture is  
   approached, used and questioned. Lectures may focus on the following: classical education for the 18th century, the influences of the Classics on  
   the production and content of modern literature, the establishing of museums, and the use and abuse of the Classics in political and  philosophical debate. For this module you will have two 2-hour sessions a week, 15 lectures and workshops and five seminars. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Ancient Faces 
   
  
    What can a face tell us? This module explores Greek and Roman portrait sculptures, how and why they were made, where they stood, and what they  
   stood for. Topics covered include: the features necessary to call a depiction of a face a portrait; the relationship of face and body in the  
    
    shaping of a portrait; the emergence of the portrait in Greek art, portraits of Greek generals and statemen, Hellenistic female portraiture, and  
    how to analyse marble portraits by means of 3D technology among others. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture per week and five 1-hour  
    seminars over the semester. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the Archaeology of the Roman Empire 
   
   
    This module provides an overview of the archaeology of the Roman Empire, developing themes encountered in the first year Rome to Revolution module. It traces the development of the Roman world and examines the archaeology of the Empire’s provinces. Specific themes in this course include town, villas and the countryside, and housing the army among other related topics. For this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Medieval World 
   
   
    This module considers the archaeology of Europe and the Mediterranean from the end of the Roman Empire to the high Middle Ages (from c. AD 400–1400). Key topics include: the formation of post-Roman societies; rural settlement; the emergence of central places and the development of towns; trade and exchange; and the introduction of Christianity and the role of the Church. The lectures and seminars, totalling around 2 hours per week, will explore integrated approaches to archaeological evidence incorporating landscapes, standing buildings, excavated sites and material culture.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Underwater Archaeology 
   
   
    This module provides you with a broad introduction to the current methods and practice of underwater archaeology. The module focuses on themes such as lake dwellings, shipwrecks, submerged cities and sunken harbours. Case studies are used ranging in space from Scandinavia to Australia and in time from BC 1500 to the last century. Some of the issues tackled in this module include; Methods and techniques of underwater excavation, Problems of conservation and underwater material, sunken harbours, cities and processes of submergences, and lake dwellings and freshwater archaeology among others. For this module you will have 2 hours of lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Mediterranean Prehistory 
   
   
    This module examines the background to its rise and nature of the first civilisations of Europe: the Minoan and Cycladic cultures of the Early Bronze Age in the Aegean. It takes a long chronological perspective, and places particular emphasis on the ‘proto-urban’ cultures of the Early Bronze Age, the first rise of palatial civilisation on Crete, the development of Iron Age societies in Greece and Italy, and what we can learn about them through archaeology. For this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
   
  Optional
   
   
  
    Dissertation 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll be able to carry out an in-depth investigation of a chosen area, to be agreed with your supervisor in advance. The topic will usually be based on an area you have covered in previous modules. You’ll use the skills that your degree has equipped you with thus far to  
    
   
     complete the work required. There will be a mix of contact to achieve this including one-to-one tutorials with your supervisor, workshops and lectures. Students who do not undertake a dissertation in archaeology will undertake a 5-6000 word independent project. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Sparta 
   
  
    Sparta dominates much of archaic and classical Greek history, and has figured prominently in the thought and imagination of other Western societies from antiquity to the present. This module will study the historical development of Sparta (in both domestic and external affairs) from the seventh to fourth centuries B.C. It will engage with the central issues that arise in historical study of Sparta: the problematic nature of our evidence; the Spartan social, political and military system; her subordinate populations; relations between Spartans and others both at home and abroad; and the forces behind Sparta's rise and fall as a great power.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Ancient Faces 
   
  
    What can a face tell us? This module explores Greek and Roman portrait sculptures, how and why they were made, where they stood, and what they stood for. Topics covered include: the features necessary to call a depiction of a face a portrait; the relationship of face and body in the shaping of a portrait; the emergence of the portrait in Greek art, portraits of Greek generals and statesmen, Hellenistic female portraiture, and how to analyse marble portraits by means of 3D technology among others. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture per week and five 1-hour seminars over the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Constantine 
   
  
    The emperor Constantine (306-337) had a significant impact on the Roman Empire and on European history in the longer-term, above all through his support for Christianity, but also through his foundation of the city of Constantinople. This module aims to place his reign in its wider context - the turmoil experienced by the Roman Empire during the third century, the recovery of stability under Diocletian and the Tetrarchy, the emergence of the Christian church as a significant feature of the empire's religious landscape, and the new military challenges which the empire faced in the form of Persia and northern barbarian groups – and to assess Constantine’s policies on a range of fronts: religious, military and social. This semester-long 10 credit module involves one 1-hour lecture each week and a fortnightly 1-hour seminar, and is assessed by an exam.