Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer.   
  
  Typical Year One Modules 
  
  
      
   Compulsory   
   
    Understanding the Past - Introduction to Archaeology  
   
   
    This module will provide you with an introduction to Archaeology as a discipline. It covers the development of the subject and examines methods for discovering, recovering and analysing archaeological remains. Archaeological prospection/survey, excavation, post-survey/excavation analysis, approaches to dating, materials analysis and an introduction to frameworks of social interpretation are all themes addressed within the module, which also introduces some of the key practical skills for archaeology. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures, seminars, practical classes, and computer workshops on average taking up about 2 hours per week across a full year.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Introduction to Archaeological Science  
   
   
    The use of methods from biological and earth sciences has transformed the practice of archaeology from the discovery of radiocarbon dating to establish chronology in distant prehistory to the use of stable isotope analysis to trace the movements and diet of past populations. This module will introduce you to some of the key developments in archaeological science over the last 50 years and will show you how scientific methods have dramatically changed our understanding of the past. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures, seminars and practical classes on average taking up about 2 hours per week across a full year.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Forests to Farmers: Prehistoric Archaeology of Britain  
   
   
    This module provides an overview of the archaeology of the British Isles from the earliest traces of human activity until the Roman invasion of Britain. It will introduce you to key concepts in prehistoric archaeology through study of the major archaeological finds and sites of the period from henges to the hillforts of Wessex. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 4 hours per week across the autumn semester.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Rome to Revolution: Historical Archaeology of Britain  
   
   
    This module provides you with an overview of the archaeology of the British Isles from the Roman invasion until the industrial revolution. Using key sites and discoveries, students will be introduced to the challenges of understanding the archaeology of periods partially documented in textual sources. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 4 hours per week across the spring semester.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Great Discoveries in Archaeology  
   
   
    In this module the staff of the archaeology department will share the sites and discoveries that not only inspired them but have also been major benchmarks in the development of the discipline. Each lecture focuses on a major discovery or theory that has fundamentally changed previous held interpretations of the past. The module also look at the personalities and ideologies that have shaped our discipline, noting how changing perspectives on gender, ethnicity and class have in turn shaped ideas about the past. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the autumn semester.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Bones, Bodies and Burials: the Archaeology of Death  
   
   
    This module examines the many types of archaeological evidence represented through the treatment of human remains from prehistory until the early modern period. You will learn how the study of human remains can give insights into past diets, social status, health and attitudes towards different members of society, while the study of burial practices can tell about the structure of societies and their beliefs. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across spring semester.  
   
  
      
   
      
  
 
     
  
     
  
  Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
      
   Compulsory  
   
    Archaeological Research: theory and practice  
   
   
    This module is aimed at helping you to develop more advanced research skills and to discover the methods that are used in major archaeological research projects. In particular you will be introduced to the research methods that you will put into practice in their third year dissertation or independent project. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Archaeology and Society: Heritage and Professional Skills  
   
   
    Heritage is now a major global industry with over 450,000 jobs linked to the heritage sector in the UK alone. This module will help you gain an understanding of how archaeology works in the UK including the legal framework covering heritage within the planning process and the use of metal detectors. You will also study the different ways in which archaeology is communicated to the wider world through multiple media and will work in groups on the public presentation of a local site. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Archaeological Evidence 1 and 2  
   
   
    These two modules run across the full academic year and allow you to focus on two specialised topics per semester, choosing from options including Glass, Metallurgy, Zooarchaeology, Archaeobotany, Building Survey, Lithics, Ceramics, and Human Skeletal Remains. Each topic is taught in a 5-week intensive block using lectures and seminars covering 3 hours per week across the academic year.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
   
    Introduction to the Archaeology of the Roman Empire  
   
   
    This module provides an overview of the archaeology of the Roman Empire, developing themes encountered in the first year Rome to Revolution module. It traces the development of the Roman world and examines the archaeology of the Empire’s provinces. Specific themes in this course include town, villas and the countryside, housing the army among other related topics. For this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year.  
   
  
      
   
   
    The Medieval World  
   
   
    This module considers the archaeology of Europe and the Mediterranean from the end of the Roman Empire to the high Middle Ages (from c. AD 400–1400). Key topics include: the formation of post-Roman societies; rural settlement; the emergence of central places and the development of towns; trade and exchange; and the introduction of Christianity and the role of the Church. The lectures and seminars, totalling around 2 hours per week, will explore integrated approaches to archaeological evidence incorporating landscapes, standing buildings, excavated sites and material culture.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Underwater Archaeology  
   
   
    This module provides you with a broad introduction to the current methods and practice of underwater Archaeology. The module focuses on themes such as lake dwellings, shipwrecks, submerged cities and sunken harbours. Case studies are used ranging in space from Scandinavia to Australia and in time from BC 1500 to the last century. Some of the issues tackled in this module include; Methods and techniques of underwater excavation, Problems of conservation and underwater material, Sunken harbours, cities and processes of submergences, and Lake dwelling and freshwater archaeology among others. For this module you will have 2 hours of lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
      
  
 
     
  
     
  
   Typical Year Three Modules  
   
  
  
      
   Compulsory  
   
    Dissertation in Archaeology  
   
   
   This module involves the preparation and production of an approved topic of 12,000-14,000 words, not including edited material. This will involve the culmination of the range of reading, learning and graphic and photographic skills acquired during the first two years of the course. The final dissertation must be in accordance with the regulations. For this module you will have a one 1-hour tutorial and a one 1-hour and a half seminar to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
   
    The Archaeology of Anglo-Saxon England  
   
   
   This module considers the archaeology of England from the end of the Roman occupation until the Norman conquest. You will focus on the question of the Romano-British survival and the impact of Romano-British culture on the Anglo-Saxon incomers, on the archaeology of the early state in England, on the development of town and rural settlement patterns, on the role of the church in society and on the Danish impact on England. For this module you will have a combination of lectures, seminars and field trips over the course of 11 weeks. 
   
  
      
   
   
    The Archaeology of the Medieval City  
   
   
   The aim of this module is to provide you with a broad knowledge of the archaeological evidence for the development of cities and urban life in the later medieval period AD 1000-1500, with a focus on English towns and cities in their wider Europe context. The module will explore the integration of varied sources of archaeological evidence including urban landscapes, buildings and material culture, and particular emphasis placed on interdisciplinary approaches to urban economic and social life. For this module you will have a combination of lectures, seminars, workshops and a fieldtrip over the period of 11 weeks. 
   
  
      
   
   
    Rome and the Mediterranean  
   
   
   In this module you will examine the archaeological evidence for the Roman period in Italy and the Mediterranean from 300 BC to AD 550. The major social, cultural and economic changes of the region in this period will be discussed as well as in the context of wider historical and archaeological approaches to the Mediterranean. You’ll have an hour of lectures and an hour-long seminar for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    The Silk Road 
   
  
    This is a discipline-bridging module taught by lecturers from across the University campus, exploring a range of archaeological, historical, geographical, biological and scientific themes for the study of the great international trade route, the Silk Road. Students will study the Byzantine and medieval Islamic Silk Roads, Renaissance Venetian luxury trade and exchange, Central Asian history and trade, 19th century perceptions of the Silk Road, scientific techniques and trade and exchange along the Silk Road and genetic studies of the movement of peoples along the Silk Road (Scandinavia, the Middle East and central Asia).