Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Learning History 
   
   
   
     This module will provide you with the learning skills necessary to make the most of your studies in history. You will be introduced to different approaches in the study of history as well as to different understandings of what history is for. The module aims to encourage more effective learning, bridge the transition from school or college to university, prepare you for more advanced work in the discipline, and enhance the skills listed. You will spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Nation, Myth, Identity: Introduction to Russian and Slavonic Studies 
   
   
    This module introduces students to important areas and topics in Russian and Slavonic Studies, examining important aspects of the histories and cultures of the region, as well as aspects of the languages, cultures and literary traditions. You will learn to analyse a wide range of cultural phenomena, including pictures, music, film, literary texts and other kinds of written sources.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
   
   Modern Russian Literature: Texts, Contexts, Approaches 
   
   
    
     This module introduces the main developments in Russian literature of the 19th and 20th centuries through study of texts by important writers such as Pushkin, Gogol, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov, Zamiatin, Mayakovsky, Akhmatova and Solzhenitsyn. You will learn skills for analysing and discussing literary texts, whether prose, poetry or drama, as well as insights into the historical and political evolution of Russia during this period.  
    
   
  
      
   
   
   The Clash of Empires: Introduction to Balkan Cultural Identities 
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to the cultural history of South Slavs and the legacy of great empires such as the Ottomans, and the Habsburgs on the Balkan peninsula. By focusing on the visual cultures of the three key religious traditions – Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic and Islamic – the module explores the common features and differences in alphabet, architecture, sculpture and painting across the region. You will learn how living under empires informed the self-understanding of Serbs, Croats, Bosniaks and other South Slav nations.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   From Tsarism to Communism: Introduction to Russian History and Culture 
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to the development of Russian history and culture, starting with the reign of Peter the Great (1682-1725), following the development of Russia into a modern state through to the end of the 19th century, and ending with a survey of the Bolshevik Revolution and the Soviet period (1917-1991). Alongside the history of Russia, you will study aspects of Russian culture relevant to different periods of its history (such as painting, architecture, music, folklore and religious beliefs).You will have three hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the Medieval World, 500-1500 
   
   
   
     This module provides an introduction to medieval European history in the period 500-1500. It offers a fresh and stimulating approach to the major forces instrumental in the shaping of politics, society and culture in Europe. Through a series of thematically linked lectures and seminars, you will be introduced to key factors determining changes in the European experience over time, as well as important continuities linking the period as a whole. Amongst the topics to be considered are: political structures and organization; social and economic life and cultural developments. You will have a one hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     From Reformation to Revolution: an introduction to early modern history, 1500-1789 
    
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to major issues in the social, political and cultural history of Europe in the early modern period by analysing demographic, religious, social and cultural changes that took place between 1500 and 1789. You’ll examine the tensions produced by warfare, religious conflict, the changing relationships between rulers, subjects and political elites, trends in socio-economic development and the discovery of the ‘New World’ spending two hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     Roads to Modernity: an introduction to modern history, 1789-1945 
    
   
   
   
     In the first semester the module provides a chronology of modern history from c.1789-1945 which concentrates principally on key political developments in European and global history such as the French Revolution, the expansion of the European empires and the two World Wars. The second semester will look more broadly at economic, social and cultural issues, such as industrialisation, urbanisation, changing artistic forms and ideological transformations in order to consider the nature of modernity. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
      
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    The Contemporary World since 1945 
   
  
    The module surveys and analyses some of the main developments in world affairs since the end of the Second World War. This includes major international events, particularly the course and aftermath of the Cold War, as well as national and regional histories, especially in Europe, East Asia and the Middle East and political and social movements. Attention is paid to political, economic and social forces spending five hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
   
    Screening Russia: Film and Society from the Tsars to Putin  
   
   
   
     In this module you will acquire an in-depth understanding of developments in Russian society and culture as reflected in popular and influential films from the period 1900 to 2010. You’ll examine how films are constructed technically and develop skills in analysing cinema in its historical and social contexts. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Repression and Resistance: Dissidents and Exiles in Russian Culture 
   
   
   
     This module provides you with an introduction to the themes of dissidence and exile, central notions in Russian literature, culture and thinking, using the examples of the life and work of four major Russian writers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (Pushkin, Dostoevsky, Nabokov, Bulgakov). You will learn the theory of different literary forms (verse narrative, novel, short story and drama). 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Medieval Russia: Rus and Muscovy, c. 900-1700 
   
   
    This module introduces the medieval period in the history of the East Slavs, covering pre-Christian times to the rise of the Romanov dynasty. You will focus on both political and cultural developments and learn to assess primary sources in various media (texts, painting, architecture) for seminar discussions and essays.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Serbian and Croatian Literature in 20th Century 
   
   
    You’ll examine major literary movements in Serbia and Croatia during the 20th century, from Modernism to the socially engaged literature of the 1930s, Socialist Realism, literary politics under the Communists in Yugoslavia and the emergence of critical literature in the 1980s and 1990s. You’ll also undertake a textual analysis of representative works from 20th century literature; for example, works by Milos Crnjanski, Ivo Andrić, Miroslav Krleža, Danilo Kiš and Slobodan Selenić. You’ll spend around two hours per week studying in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Yogoslavia and Successor States since 1941  
   
   
    The aim of this module is to examine developments in the political, social and diplomatic history of Yugoslavia after 1941 leading towards an understanding of the reasons behind the collapse of the country and subsequent violence in the 1990s. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Crusades 
   
   
   
     This module addresses evidence for crusader motivation and experience through sources relating to crusading activity in Europe and the Middle East from the late eleventh century to the mid-13th century. It seeks to understand how crusaders saw themselves and their enemies, their experiences and activity on crusade and as settlers, and how this horrifying yet enduringly fascinating process has been interpreted historically. You’ll have five hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    De-industrialisation: A Social and Cultural History, 1970-1990 
   
   
   
     This module examines the social and cultural impact of economic change in three traditional industrial regions in the UK, Germany and the US in the 1970s and 1980s. It takes thematic approaches, exploring topics including: overlaps and differences between Contemporary History and the Social Sciences; change and decline in traditional industries such as coal, steel and shipbuilding; political responses to industrial change, with a particular focus on industrial conflict over closures, among others. You’ll spend four hours per week in lecture and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Soviet State and Society 
   
   
   
     This module examines political, social and economic transformations in the Soviet Union from the October Revolution of 1917 to Gorbachev’s attempted reforms and the collapse of the state in 1991. You’ll look at Russia both from the top down (state-building strategies; leadership and regime change, economic and social policy formulation and implementation) and from the bottom up (societal developments and the changing structures and practices of everyday life). You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     Race, Rights and Propaganda: the superpowers, the Cold War, and the politics of racial identity, 1945-89 
    
   
   
   
     The Cold War was a conflict defined as much by intellectual and cultural struggle as by conventional military means, diplomacy, or realpolitik. Conceptions of race and identity were by no means immune from this, but heavily disputed and contested in the political environment of the Cold War. This module examines how the two superpowers dealt with issues of race and identity during the Cold War years, confronting questions and challenges from both within their own borders (and each other’s) and in several theatres of superpower conflict – including the Middle East, East Asia and post-colonial Africa. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   
   Myths and Memories: Histories of Russia’s Second World War 
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to the construction of national and collective memory of the Second World War in Soviet and Russian culture and society. You’ll focus on contemporary and subsequent artistic and social responses to the experience of war, but also look at individual acts of remembering (diaries, reports, letters) in the context of a wider cultural memory. The module is conducted in English and you’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   The History of the Byzantine Empire, 300-1453 
   
   
   
     This module offers advanced study of the history of the Byzantine Empire from the reign of Constantine I to the fall of Constantinople. The course is structured chronologically, focussing on particular themes for each period: religion and heresy in late antiquity; warfare and the arts in middle Byzantium; and politics and international relations in late Byzantium. In an average week you’ll spend around three hours in lectures and seminars on this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     From Racial State to Reconstruction: women and gender relations in Germany, 1939-45 
    
   
   
   
     This module adopts a perspective of women&acute;s and gender history to explore the history of Germany in the period from the beginning of the National Socialist dictatorship up to the division of Germany into two post-war states in 1949. It will examine National Socialist discourses, policies and practices in relation to women and gender relations by drawing on records of public authorities and institutions concerned with educating and training the female population in line with Nazi precepts, mobilizing labour for the Nazi war economy, sustaining home front morale, and combating 'threats to the race'. You’ll have a weekly three hour seminar to study for this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Italy at War, 1935-45 
   
   
   
     Spending three hours per week in seminars and tutorials, you will be given a framework to understand the experience of Italians (and to a lesser degree their enemies, allies, and collaborators) during the military conflicts in the long decade 1935–45, as well as knowledge of the background factors that shaped these experiences.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     The Missing Dimension: intelligence and international history in the 20th Century 
    
   
   
   
     The history of secret intelligence was once called the ‘missing dimension’ in the study of politics and international relations. Today, it has established itself as a separate field of historical enquiry. This module will examine how the study of secret intelligence has informed and sometimes even altered our understanding of some of the major political and international crises of the 20th century. You will spend three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   East European and Balkan Cultural Studies 
   
   
    
     The module examines issues covering the division of Europe into East and West, the West’s construction of Russian, East European and Balkan identities in its own imagination, relations between dominant and subordinate cultures in Europe, and theoretical frameworks in which to examine intercultural relations (semiotics, orientalism). You will examine examples of such constructions in travelogues, popular fiction, film and journalism. The module also includes study of the influence of such largely negative views on identity formation within Eastern Europe and the Balkans.  
    
   
  
      
   
   
   The Petersburg Text 
   
  
    Through three hours of lectures and seminars each week, you’ll undertake an in-depth analysis of the Russian imperial capital, St Petersburg and its artistic representations. You will study the development of the image of St Petersburg in Russian poetry (Pushkin, Blok, Akhmatova, Mandelshtam) and prose (Gogol, Dostoevsky, Bely, Bitov) of both the 19th and 20th centuries. You’ll also be given a historical overview of the evolution of the legend of St Petersburg, its representations in folklore, and readings of its urban landscape. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Serbian/Croatian for Linguists  
   
  
    This module is a fast-track course of study for students in their final year who wish to acquire a new language. The module is based on the textbook Teach Yourself Serbian and will introduce you to everyday use of the language. Through three hours of practical classes each week, you’ll study different points of grammar (syntax and morphology) as well as vocabulary for everyday situations.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Serbian/Croatian Cinema: Selected Works 
   
  
    Developing your ability in addressing the study of cinema, this module examines the ways in which themes, motifs and narrative structures of films combine to produce semantically complex interfaces through which they also reflect the cultural circumstances of their production. In an average week you’ll spend around six hours in lectures, seminars and film viewings. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Slovene for Linguists 
   
  
    This is a fast-track course of study for students in their final year who wish to acquire a new language. The module is based on materials and teaching methods developed by the Centre for Slovene as a Second/Foreign Language, and its aim is to introduce you to everyday use of the language using a communicative approach. Through three hours of practical classes each week, you’ll study different points of grammar (syntax and morphology) as well as vocabulary for everyday situations.