Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
   
    Introduction to German Studies 
   
   
    This year-long module provides an introduction to the study of German and is compulsory for most students of German. It covers the main fields of German Studies: literature, culture, history, linguistics, media and film. You will be introduced to the study skills required for academic study: critical and analytic skills, reading skills, presentation skills and writing skills. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Learning History 
   
   
    This module will provide you with the learning skills necessary to make the most of your studies in history. You will be introduced to different approaches in the study of history as well as to different understandings of the functions served by engagement with the past. The module aims to encourage more effective learning, bridge the transition from school or college to university, prepare you for more advanced work in the discipline, and enhance the skills listed. You will spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
   Either  
  
    German 1 
   
   
   Using up-to-date material from the German-speaking world this core module will help you improve your command of written and spoken German. Continuing with the four skills areas of A-level work (writing, reading, listening, and speaking) you will develop them further through a variety of exercises whilst gaining insights into contemporary German life, culture and politics. For this module you will have one 1-hour grammar lecture each week and three 1-hour tutorials per week where you will work in small groups usually led by German native speakers. In addition you are expected to undertake at least four hours of private study each week. 
   
  
      
   
      
   Or  
  
    German 1 - Beginners 
   
   
    This module is designed to take students from ab initio level (absolute beginners) to a level of written and aural comprehension, writing and speaking skills roughly commensurate with A-level. At the end of the module, students should be able to comprehend and respond to written and aural texts over a comprehensive range of current affairs, cultural and every day topics and engage in everyday social conversation.  
      
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Reading German Literature I 
   
   
    In this module you will be introduced to the critical reading and textual analysis of German narrative literature and poetry from the late 18th century to today. You will study two mid-length narrative texts and a selection of poems which represent key phases and aspects of German literary and cultural development from ‘Goethezeit’ to the post-1945 and contemporary period. In analysing and discussing a range of texts and authors, you will be introduced to key concepts and techniques of textual analysis, to the structures of narrative and poetry, and to selected themes and developments in literary criticism. The module combines one 1-hour introductory lecture per week with in-depth study in small tutorial groups (one 1-hour tutorial per week), in addition you will undertake four hours of private study per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Reading German Culture  
   
   
    In this module you will learn to analyse short literary and popular texts (including film) which portray life in the metropolis Berlin and represent  key phases in German historical and social development in the 20th century: the 1920s, the immediate post war-period, post-unification Berlin. Exploring cultural representations of urban life the course will address key questions such as: How do textual perceptions of the ‘big’ city reflect attitudes towards relationships conditioned by class, gender and race? For this module you will have one 2-hour seminars each week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Hitler and the Third Reich 
   
   
    This module will explore the period of National Socialism in Germany from 1933-1945. You will be introduced to an outline of the historical context of this period and critically review the ideology and politics of the time with a focus on society and culture. You will evaluate original sources (in original and in translation) such as posters, speeches, newspapers and films. In addition, theoretical writings on select topics such as propaganda, ‘leader cult’, media, childhood, womanhood and ‘the other;’ will assist in your critical analysis. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Linguistics 1: The Sounds of German 
   
   
    This module investigates the sounds of German and how they can be described accurately (“phonetics and phonology”). Students will learn to transcribe German using the notation of the International Phonetic Association, and we will look in particular at aspects of German pronunciation that are hard to master because they are different to English or similar to French. We will also look at how foreign words (including English words) are integrated into the German sound system, and at regional variation in spoken German. Developing accurate listening and transcription skills will form a major part of the module. There will be a one hour lecture and a one hour workshop each week, in addition to four hours private study time.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the Medieval World, 500-1500 
   
   
    This module provides an introduction to medieval European history in the period 500–1500. It offers a fresh and stimulating approach to the major forces instrumental in the shaping of politics, society and culture in Europe. Through a series of thematically linked lectures and seminars, you will be introduced to key factors determining changes in the European experience over time, as well as important continuities linking the period as a whole. Amongst the topics to be considered are: political structures and organization; social and economic life and cultural developments. You will have a one hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Reformation to Revolution: an introduction to early modern history, 1500-1789 
   
   
    This module introduces you to major issues in the social, political and cultural history of Europe in the early modern period by analysing demographic, religious, social and cultural changes that took place between 1500 and 1789. You will examine the tensions produced by warfare, religious conflict, the changing relationships between rulers, subjects and political elites, trends in socio-economic development and the discovery of the ‘New World’. You will spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Roads to Modernity: an introduction to modern history, 1789-1945 
   
   
    In the first semester, the module provides a chronology of modern history from c.1789–1945 which concentrates principally on key political developments in European and global history such as the French Revolution, the expansion of the European empires and the two World Wars. The second semester will look more broadly at economic, social and cultural issues, such as industrialisation, urbanisation, changing artistic forms and ideological transformations in order to consider the nature of modernity. You will spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    The Contemporary World since 1945 
   
   
    The module surveys and analyses some of the main developments in world affairs since the end of the Second World War. This includes major international events, particularly the course and aftermath of the Cold War, as well as national and regional histories, especially in Europe, East Asia and the Middle East; the module also looks at key political and social movements. Attention is paid to political, economic and social forces, with students spending five hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
   Either  
  
    German 2 
   
   
   This core module consolidates your proficiency in the four skill areas of German Language 1 (writing, reading, listening, and speaking) in order to develop these further. Using contemporary material this module is also tailor-made to prepare you for the period you will spend in a German-speaking country studying, working or teaching. It includes German CV writing, interview preparations, presentations, translation from and into German and advanced grammar work. For this module you will be taught in small groups, usually by German native speakers. You will have one 2-hour seminar and one 1- hour grammar tutorial each week in addition to a minimum of four hours of private study. 
   
  
      
   
   Or  
  
    German 2 - Beginners 
   
   
    This module will consolidate students' proficiency in the four skill areas of German Language 1 (writing, reading, listening and speaking) and develop these further. The vehicles for instruction will be texts from newspapers and other sources, which will be used for discussion of translation issues and grammatical structures, linguistic analysis and textual comparison, oral presentation, and essay writing.  
      
   
  
      
   
     Optional  
  
    Media in Germany 
   
   
    The aim of this module is to explore the history of print and broadcasting in Germany from 1933 to  the 1990s, and investigate the relationship between media content and culture. You will develop a foundation in the key concepts of media studies and gain insight into the connection of media and ideology. For this module you will have one 2-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Literary Translation 
   
   
    This module explores theoretical approaches and practical problems in literary translation. You will study different approaches to translating texts and compose a translation of a text of your choice. You will have one 2-hour seminar and one 1-hour workshop per week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    New German Cinema 
   
   
    Between the mid 1960s and the mid 1980s West German cinema rose to new national and international success due to the work of a number of young directors who were commonly perceived as representatives of a "New" or "Young" German cinema. This module will analyse selected films from this period. You will be introduced to the individual styles of different directors (Fassbinder, Herzog, Wenders) as well as to their common thematic preoccupations. The analysis will aim to situate the "New German Cinema" within the contexts both of the development of the film industry and of contemporary social and political developments in West Germany. You will have one 2-hour seminar and one 1-hour workshop per week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Reason and its Rivals from Kant to Freud 
   
   
    This module discusses a selection of theoretical approaches to modernity. You will start by studying Immanuel Kant’s assertion of individual reason as the founding stone of enlightened social organisation. You will then explore interrogations of that position in the work of Marx and Engels, Nietzsche and Freud. You will have one 2-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Fremdsprachen lernen und lehren 
   
   
    This module introduces you to some major theories of how languages are learned and to some approaches to how languages can be taught, particularly focussing on German and English. We will consider the differences between first and second language acquisition; whether there is a ‘best’ age to learn a foreign language; why some people learn languages more easily than others; and some particular problems for English-speaking learners of German and German-speaking learners of English. It will appeal to anyone with an interest in linguistics, as well as to those who might be considering teaching on the year abroad or in the future. For this module you will have one 2-hour seminar each week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to German Dialects 
   
   
    This module explores the various dialects spoken in Germany and other German-speaking areas. It examines the key linguistic features which can be used to identify a dialect, and explores the use of dialect, which has changed considerably over the past centuries, but particularly since 1945, and which also varies considerably regionally. It also looks at the interactions between the dialects and the standard language (‘High German’). For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Heroes and Villains in the Middle Ages 
   
   
    The module compares and contrasts key historical, legendary and fictional figures to examine the development of western medieval values and ideologies such as monasticism, chivalry and kingship. It explores how individuals shaped ideal types and how they themselves strove to match medieval archetypes. The binary oppositions between ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are explored through study of the ‘bad king’, and the creation of villains such as the Jew. You will spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Crusades 
   
   
    This module addresses evidence for crusader motivation and experience through sources relating to crusading activity in Europe and the Middle East from the late eleventh century to the mid- thirteenth century. It seeks to understand how crusaders saw themselves and their enemies, their experiences and activity on crusade and as settlers, and how this horrifying yet enduringly fascinating process has been interpreted historically. You will have five hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Venetian Republic 
   
   
    This module explores the nature of the Venetian Republic in the later fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. It examines the constitution, its administrative and judicial system, its imperial and military organisation, but will above all focus on the city and its inhabitants itself. The module will discuss the enormous cultural dynamism of the city (especially the visual arts from the Bellini to Tintoretto and Veronese), changing urban fabric, the role of ritual and ceremony, the position of the Church, and class and gender. You will spend four hours each week in lectures and seminars for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    De-industrialisation: A Social and Cultural History, 1970-1990 
   
   
    This module examines the social and cultural impact of economic change in three traditional industrial regions in the UK, Germany and the US in the 1970s and 1980s. It takes thematic approaches, exploring topics including: overlaps and differences between Contemporary History and the Social Sciences; change and decline in traditional industries such as coal, steel and shipbuilding; political responses to industrial change, with a particular focus on industrial conflict over closures, among others. You will spend four hours per week in lecture and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Soviet State and Society 
   
   
    This module examines political, social and economic transformations in the Soviet Union from the October Revolution of 1917 to Gorbachev’s attempted reforms and the collapse of the state in 1991. You will look at Russia both from the top down (state-building strategies; leadership and regime change; economic and social policy formulation and implementation) and from the bottom up (societal developments and the changing structures and practices of everyday life). You will spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
   Year spent abroad. Please see the  Department of German Studies Year Abroad page.   
  
 
     
  
  
   
   Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    German 3 
   
   
    This core module aims to consolidate the high level of language skills you will have acquired during the time spent in a German-speaking country in Year 3.  In classes taught by native speakers of German, you will further refine your advanced proficiency in written and spoken German. Contemporary texts and discussions of up-to-date topics are a key feature of this module and you will be encouraged to build on the knowledge and skills acquired during your year abroad. For this module you will have two 1-hour seminars each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Translation from German 
   
   
    This core module will enhance your practical command and effective understanding of written and German and English on the basis of your progress during your year abroad, through translation of a variety of German texts and passages. This module will develop your translation skills towards professional standards for translation into English. For this module you will have one 2-hour seminar each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Dissertation 
   
   
    This module involves the in-depth study of a historical subject from which you will create a 10,000 word dissertation. You will have regular meetings with your supervisor and a weekly one hour lecture to guide you through this task.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Translation and Linguistic Exchange 
   
   
    This module offers in-depth discussion of grammatical, lexical and idiomatic aspects of German and English as well as issues of translation, register and cultural difference. You will be taught primarily through the medium of translation, both from and into German, using a variety of texts and passages on a range of topics and in a range of registers. You will work in a team with exchange students who are German native speakers and this will foster dialogue about linguistic and translation issues as well as general cultural exchange. You will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    German Studies Dissertation (10 credits) 
   
   
    This module involves the in-depth study of a topic in German Studies resulting in a dissertation written in German. You will write a 4,000 word essay in German or English on a topic of your particular interest and expertise (normally related to a German module which you have taken in your second or final year). In addition to extensive private study you will have two 1-hour seminars per semester followed by five individual meetings with your supervisor. This module is also available as a 20 credit version where you will write a 7,000 word essay in German or English.    
   
  
      
   
  
    Culture and Society in the Weimar Republic 
   
   
    The Weimar Republic (1919-1933) was one of the most fascinating and culturally productive periods of German history, but it was equally plagued by crises and violent conflicts. This module aims to introduce central issues in the literary and social developments of Weimar Germany. You will study a wide range of materials (literary texts, film, aesthetic and political programmes) to analyse key features of the period. Topics will include the impact of the Great War, developments in the press and the cinema, political confrontations, cabaret, and unemployment. You will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar per week in addition to extensive independent study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Recent Women's Writing 
   
   
    In this module you will explore a number of novels and stories written since 1960 by German-speaking women writers. You will also study selected texts on the cultural, political and social contexts of the rise of the second wave feminism in the 1970’s, the changing position of women in the FRG, GDR and Austria, and the increasing awareness of ethnic pluralities. You will compare texts and contexts and explore a variety of reading strategies developed in feminist criticism. For this module you will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar each week in addition to extensive independent study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    ‘Heimat’ in the German Cinema 
   
   
    Heimat, a political and psychological concept of rural rootedness, is at the core of German identity, and the Heimat genre has been ever-present in the German cinema since the days of the silent cinema. This module will explore the cultural and historical contexts of the concept of Heimat through the study of Heimat films from different historical moments. We will explore the artistically ambitious and politically controversial 1920s/30s mountain films; the immensely popular Heimat films of the 1950s; the aesthetically challenging and critical anti-Heimat films of the 1960s/70s; Edgar Reitz’s landmark historical saga of the 1980s; and post-1990s reinventions of the genre. We shall ask why film-makers in Germany and Austria keep returning to this genre. In addition we shall consider the question of the alien within the Heimat, the gendering of Heimat and the representation of nature and modernity in these films. You will have a two hour seminar, a one hour syndicate workshop, a two hour screening, plus extensive independent study each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Communicating and Teaching Languages for Undergraduate Ambassadors 
   
   
    In this module you will take part in the nationwide Undergraduate Ambassadors Scheme which works with universities to provide academic modules that enable students to go into local schools to act as inspiring role-models. Students split their time between the university-based seminar and their allocated school, where they are placed in the language department as a language assistant. Students are required to design and deliver a teaching project aimed at improving pupil understanding of selected aspects of the German language and culture. Students will be supported by the module convenor and the education specialist on campus, and by their contact teacher at their school. Typically there are fortnightly seminars of 2-hours at university and seven half-days spent in school. Students can choose to be ambassadors for German or French, Spanish, and Russian. Placements are predominantly in secondary schools, with a limited number in primary schools.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Age of Empire: Conquest and Colonialism since the 19th Century 
   
   
    In this module you will be introduced to key themes, theories and debates that informed the study of modern European imperialism and colonialism. Concepts and theories will be explored using a variety of case studies looking at issues such as the motivations underpinning Europe’s imperial expansion during the 19th century, modes and forms of colonial rule, as well as collaboration and resistance. In this module you’ll have a three hour lecture and a one-hour seminar each week.    
   
  
      
   
  
    The History of a Relation: Jews in Modern Europe 
   
   
    This special subject surveys and analyses the place of Jews in modern European history. Throughout the modern period, Jews lived in Europe as a part of minority. In this module you’ll analyse the enduring, productive and resilient relation between Jews and non-Jews. It is the contention of this module that the story of the relationships development and evolution can tell us a great deal of the history of Europe as a whole. For this module you’ll have a one 2-hour tutorial and a one 1-hour tutorial each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Britain on Film  
   
   
    You’ll analyse some of the key films made in Britain since 1945 which forms the basis of this module using a series of films as historical documents and will analyse what they can tell us about the society which produced them. Some of the key themes include (these are subject to change every year): Film/History/Theory, Brief Encounter, in which we serve, Dracula, The Servant, and Blow up among others. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and a one 2-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Missing Dimension: intelligence and international history in the twentieth century 
   
   
    The history of secret intelligence was once called the ‘missing dimension’ in the study of politics and international relations. Today, it has established itself as a separate field of historical enquiry. This module will examine how the study of secret intelligence has informed and sometimes even altered our understanding of some of the major political and international crises of the twentieth century. You will spend three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Kings, Saints and Monsters, 450-850 
   
   
    This module examines cultural and political changes in the southern half of the island of Britain between the fifth and ninth centuries, in particular the development of kingship and kingdoms as a form of political organisation, and the effects of the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity. You will spend three hours in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Italy at War, 1935-45 
   
   
    Spending three hours per week in seminars and tutorials, you will be given a framework to understand the experience of Italians (and to a lesser degree their enemies, allies, and collaborators) during the military conflicts in the long decade 1935–45, as well as knowledge of the background factors that shaped these experiences. As source material you will have the chance to explore diplomatic correspondence, personal memoirs, newspapers and magazines, newsreels, as well as examining the representation of the war in literature and cinema.