Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  Typical year one modules  
  Core  
 
   Applied Quantitative Methods for Business in China 
  
  
   This module provides an introduction to some of the quantitative techniques and IT skills employed in economic and business analysis. Content includes:  
   
    Numbers   
    Algebra   
    Function   
    Linear and non-linear equations   
    Maths for business and economics   
    Index numbers   
    Differentiation   
    Optimisation  
   
   The emphasis is on practical application of mathematical techniques rather than on the study of mathematics.  
   This module aims to develop students' skills of applying algebra techniques to formulate and solve quantitative business and economic problems.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Approaches to Contemporary Chinese Studies 
  
  
   This is an introductory course designed to provide students with appropriate study skills, familiarity with resources, an understanding of the methodological approaches used in studying contemporary China, to develop students' understanding of how to use critical approaches to study all aspects of contemporary Chinese society.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    develop students' ability to find and utilise relevant empirical materials   
    develop students' intellectual and transferable vocational skills   
    develop e-learning skills  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Essentials of Economics 
  
  
   The economic principles will be taught using applications to China.  
   Part 1: Introducing Economics  
   
    What do economists study?   
    Different economic systems   
    The nature of economic reasoning  
   
   Part 2: Foundations of Microeconomics  
   
    The theory of demand   
    The theory of supply   
    Elasticities of demand and supply   
    Background to demand   
    Background to supply  
   
   Part 3: Foundations of Macroeconomics  
   
    The national economy   
    Unemployment and inflation  
    The open economy  
   
   The module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to thinking like an economist   
    help students make sense of decisions people make on the daily basis  
    provide an introduction to the main important theoretical models and concepts that can be applied to a wide range of economic problems  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Accounting with Application to China 
  
  
   Accounting is a unique subject that its standards vary substantially across difference countries, however, share certain common elements too. It is difficult and actually legally banned to work without a proper level of knowledge in accounting in China as well as in other countries.  
   This course is divided into two parts. The first part covers Chinese financial accounting and the second Chinese management accounting. Both financial and management accounting deal with economic events and both involve financial statements. It is essential that managers understand that the significant differences between financial and management accounting arise because they serve different audiences.  
   The financial aspects of the business permeate most areas of management. The financial accounting elements of this course will leave the student with the opportunity to function as an effective manager in the knowledge that they can identify, explain and assess the potential use of major tools and techniques relating to financial interpretation.  
   The aim of this module is to train the students with solid understanding of general accounting foundation at the beginning level, as well as the Chinese accounting systems.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Contemporary China 
  
  
   This is an introductory course designed to provide students with an overview of contemporary China and help students establish a foundation of knowledge and skills to pursue more advanced studies of China in their later years of study. The module examines the following topics since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, though particular attention is paid to the changes in China since 1978.  
   On completion of this module, students will:  
   
    have a basic knowledge of political, economic, social and environmental developments in contemporary China   
    be familiar with theoretical debates regarding issues in contemporary China and differing empirical approaches to studying the nature of changes in contemporary China   
    be able to comment in an informed, critical manner on contemporary issues and developments   
    have improved their capacity to conduct research on contemporary China  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Finance with Application to China 
  
  
   Topics to be covered include:  
   
    Company structures, goals and finance   
    Preparation of financial reports and financial ratio analysis  
    Introduction to investment appraisal techniques: ARR, Payback, NPV and IRR   
    Making investment decisions and valuing investment opportunities, company valuation techniques   
    Sources of finance  
   
   This module aims to give you a clear and practical introduction to the major themes of finance generally and specific to China. These include a thorough examination of the main techniques of investment appraisal and also a discussion in the main methods of financing companies.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Management Accounting and Decisions I 
  
  
   This module introduces the following:  
   
    Cost concepts and allocation of manufacturing overheads  
    Absorption and variable costing  
    Cost-volume-profit analysis  
    Relevant costing-  
    Budgeting   
   
   The module aims to introduce the techniques of management accounting and how they assist in management decision-making.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Mandarin Chinese for Beginners 
  
  
   Mandarin modules are available from beginners’ (Level 1) to research (Level 5). Students are assessed and placed at the appropriate level of study.   
   Please note: Native speakers of Mandarin will take Advanced English for Disciplinary Study modules instead of Mandarin.  
   This module provide students with the knowledge of Chinese phonetics, grammar, vocabulary and cultural information in order to develop their competence in Mandarin Chinese. The focus is on communicative competence in both spoken and written language. The script of Mandarin Chinese is taught to make sure that students on the course are not disadvantaged by their written language.  
   The overall aim of the module is provide students with the phonetic and basic grammatical knowledge and develop a competence in Mandarin Chinese in spoken and written language.  
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   East Asian Business in the Twentieth Century 
  
  
   In view of the impact East Asian business has had on world business and trading patterns in recent decades, it is important to understand how business has evolved in the region. This module provides the historical background to key developments in East Asian business, including:  
   
    The history of Western business in Asia from colonial times to the post-Second World War period   
    The economic, political and social background to business development in key countries in the region   
    The emergence of Japan as Asia's first industrialized nation, the 'Economic Miracle' and development of the 'Japan, Inc.' model   
    The development paths of East Asia's newly industrialized countries (NICs) from colonial rule into the 1980s China's post-1978 economic growth and business development   
    The 1997 Asian financial crisis Business organisation, industrial groups, and industrial relations in East Asia  
   
   This module aims to assess the reasons why industrial capitalism developed in East Asian economies, as well as to analyse how it was adapted to local circumstances. As well as the major economies like Japan, China, and South Korea, insights will also be gained into smaller countries like Malaysia, Indonesia, and Hong Kong. Time will also be devoted to the Chinese diaspora and the development of Chinese and other transnational business groups in the East Asian region.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Business and Economy of China 
  
  
   This module intends to provide the fundamental knowledge of China's economic transformation and business development. It assists students to establish an understanding of issues including economic strategies, industrial sector transformation, investment, trade and business management.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    provide an introductory programme that facilitates students learning in the disciplines of Management, Economics and Chinese Studies  
    introduce to students theoretical debates and empirical materials that are used in explaining business-related issues  
    familiarize students with comparative perspectives on business practices generally, and Chinese business practices specifically  
    practise and develop students' intellectual and transferable vocational skills   
    foster students' awareness with economic issues, policies and institutions of China  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to the Chinese Legal System 
  
  
   The module aims to provide an introduction to the origin, key elements and characteristics of the evolving Chinese legal system. It mainly includes an introduction to the history of Chinese law, organisation of the P.R.China as a state and its constitutional laws, the law making process in China, the legal institutions and the Chinese court system, the criminal process, the civil process and legal profession in China.   
   Based on the introduction on the legal system, it also aims to provide contextual understanding on the political, social and cultural factors which have impacted or shaped the Chinese legal development.  
   The educational aims of this module include:  
   
    Providing an overview to the Chinese legal system   
    Introducing students to the origin, key elements and characteristics of the Chinese legal system   
    Setting out the foundation for students to better understand important issues in relation to studies on contemporary China (such as economic reform, promotion of democracy and human rights, protection of environment and sustainable development) from a legal perspective   
    Further development of analytical skills  
   
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year two modules  
  Core modules in China  
 
   Accounting and Information Systems 
  
  
   The module covers the following:  
   
    The use of accounting information systems in financial and management accounting and their control and audit  
    Introduction to systems  
    Business processes  
    Budgeting and decision support systems  
    Internal control and audit  
    Computer crime and external audit  
    Enterprise resource planning systems  
   
   The module aims to provide students with an understanding of how information technology can support the activities of the accountant and management within an organisation and the problems associated with controlling and auditing such esulting information systems.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Financial Management 
  
  
   The module will introduce students to the corporate investment and financing decision as well as the interaction between the investment and financing decision.  
   This module aims to help students develop a critical understanding of the theory and practice of corporate financial management.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Intermediate Mandarin 
  
  
   Mandarin modules are available from beginners’ (Level 1) to research (Level 5). Students are assessed and placed at the appropriate level of study.   
   Please note: Native speakers of Mandarin will take Advanced English for Disciplinary Study modules instead of Mandarin.  
   This module concentrates on revising the basic skills acquired during previous study and aims to further develop students' oral and written communicative ability in the Mandarin Chinese language in more complex situations. The Mandarin Chinese language will be used as much as possible in class.  
   The overall aim of the module is to produce students who develop further competence in the four skills of the Mandarin Chinese language: listening, speaking, reading and writing, together with more complex grammatical structures.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Management Accounting and Decisions II 
  
  
   This module will develop skills in the computational aspects of management accounting and explore the relevance, significance and applicability of such techniques.  
   The aim of this module is to explore the role of traditional and contemporary management accounting in a range of different organisational environments.  
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional modules in China  
 
   International Political Economy 
  
  
   This module introduces students to the major topics in China's interaction with and role in international political economy (IPE). It includes useful concepts and theories in IPE, the evolution of China’s ties with international political economy since 1949, the linkage between domestic and international political economy of China and players in the making of external political economic policies in China.  
   It also examines China's role in international economic regimes (such as the WTO) and in the global and regional orders of political economy. It provides a survey of the political economy of China’s ties with the major powers and regions such as the US, East Asia, and major oil producing nations.  
   This module aims at enabling students to develop an understanding of the role China plays in international political economy and think critically issues related to this topic.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Management Strategy 
  
  
   This module provides participants with a theoretical and applied overview of strategic management in today's operational environment. It introduces and analyses the key concepts, frameworks and techniques of strategic management, which allow them to diagnose complex situations related to real-world business development.  
   The module aim is to introduce and discuss the key concept, theories and frameworks integral to the strategic management of organisations and to apply them to real-world situations.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Techniques in Contemporary China 
  
  
   How do researchers plan and deliver research projects? What are some of the ethical and practical considerations central to carrying out research? How do students start to become researchers in the China field? This module will address these questions by developing students’ skills, knowledge and understanding of a range of research methods and fieldwork techniques in the Chinese context.   
   Topics for this module cover research design and strategies, case studies, semi-structured interviews, content & discourse analysis, risk assessment, safety and ethical issues, group and individual research projects.  
   Students will undertake practical fieldwork activities while based at The University of Nottingham campus in Ningbo. Seminar contact hours will comprise of student-led teaching sessions, small group and/or individual tutorials, and fieldwork trips. Where possible, students of Chinese language programmes will be encouraged to apply their nascent Chinese language skills to research tasks. Relevant fieldwork, information gathering and recording, writing and presentation skills will also be developed and enhanced.  
   The aims of this module are to:  
   
    develop awareness and understanding of a range of research methods and fieldwork techniques in China  
    enable students to plan and undertake research activities in a field setting in China  
    provide guidance in the development of safety, ethical and cross-cultural considerations associated with research and fieldwork investigations  
    introduce skills of information collection and synthesis, and develop the ability to evaluate the significance and relevance of information  
    enable students to locate and handle a variety of primary source materials together with other relevant data, and to construct a bibliography of secondary sources  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Core modules in Nottingham  
 
   Chinese Business Law 
  
  
   The module aims to provide an overview of the development of Chinese business law in the context of economic globalization and in particular of China's WTO membership. The module mainly includes:  
   
    Political economy of business regulation in China and China's WTO membership  
    Introduction to the Chinese's legal system and law making process  
    Chinese contract law, law on business organisations, company law and corporate governance in China, Chinese anti-monopoly law and intellectual property laws  
   
   It concludes with discussions on the possible impacts of China's integration into the economic globalization on its domestic business regulation.  
   The module aims to develop students' knowledge and understanding on the legal framework of business regulation in China after its WTO membership. It in particular focuses on the characteristics of contemporary Chinese business law. By introducing the transformation of the business laws in China, it aims to serve as one useful angel for students to better understand the transformation in the contemporary China.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Management and Financial Accounting in China 
  
  
   This is an undergraduate level module in accounting. The topics to be covered include:  
   
    The scope and characteristics of management accounting   
    Absorption costing, marginal costing and activity-based costing   
    Budgeting   
    Standard costing and variance analysis   
    The context and purpose of financial accounting  
    Statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income  
    Statement of financial position   
    Cash flow statements   
    Performance measurement and control   
    Introduction of corporate governance, internal control, and ethics  
   
   The aim of this module is to train the students with solid understanding of general accounting foundation, as well as the Chinese accounting systems. The module enables students to develop the key decision-making skills by applying accounting and financial techniques to assist in control and planning at management level.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Managerial Finance in China 
  
  
   The purpose of this module is to enable students to apply corporate financial theory to problems faced by corporate decision makers, and also understand the investment and financial decisions under Chinese financial, legal and regulatory environment.  
   The module aims are to:  
   
    consolidate and further develop an understanding - in the Chinese context - of company financial management issues and concepts building on, or supplemental to, the Financial Management unit and providing a solid base for the specialist units   
    understand and apply financial management principles and techniques in corporate finance decision making situations, particularly in the Chinese investment and finance   
    appreciate the importance of the role of financial management decisions in Chinese and global markets, and to business strategy and corporate objectives   
    encourage students to contribute to the lecture and tutorial discussions and debates, and to help them design, structure and research their own learning of financial management issues of Chinese and international dimensions   
    undertake contemporary research into financial management decisions in China and their interactions within China and internationally  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional modules in Nottingham  
 
   East Asian Business in the Global Economy 
  
  
   The organisation and globalisation of business in the major economies of East Asia will be examined. Focusing on Japan, China and Korea, it will be possible to identify characteristic features of East Asian business systems, the internationalisation of various types of business systems and the trajectories of interaction between East Asian and north Atlantic businesses.  
   This module is aimed principally at assessing the interactions between East Asian Business and the global economy. Building on the first semester module that outlines the evolution of East Asian business systems, this module will contextualise these developments and link them with recent trends associated with globalisation.  
   Students will become familiar with the nature of East Asian business, how East Asian economies have fared over the last 20 years, and the influence of 'collective management' practices on European and American business and organisations. They will also be able to judge the extent to which convergence has become a major force in world business over the last 20 years.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Social Change and Public Policy in China's Reform Era 
  
  
   Students will learn how the Chinese central government has responded to socio-economic changes by issuing a number of key policy initiatives, most notably in the field of social security, health, education, labour, innovation and the environment. In the first part of the module participants will be sensitized about the interplay between socio-economic transformation, administrative reform and public policy making during China's reform era (1978-). Students will gain a deeper understanding how new government functions contribute to innovations in public sector management.  
   Drawing both on primary and secondary sources students will familiarise themselves with the increasingly lively domestic debates among social and political scientists, educators, media professionals, civil society practitioners, government officials and lawyers about goals and means of China's modernisation drive. In the second part of the module students will learn about the expanded spaces for participatory policy making in China by analysing case studies in all five substantive policy fields.  
   Students will be enabled to acquire the necessary theoretical and practical skills to analyse public policies in China. They will be encouraged to think critically about policy models and contrast them with evolving practices of public policy making in China.  
   Participants will gain a better understanding of the scale of social change in China, learn about the value of participatory policy making, and through small and big group deliberations and action will internalise a culture of collaboration by developing group presentations on selected public policies.  
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year three modules  
  Core  
 
   Advanced Financial Reporting and Auditing 
  
  
   The purpose of this module is to enable students to develop advanced knowledge and skills in financial reporting and auditing. The content will be analysed with reference to Chinese financial, legal and regulatory environment.  
   The module aims are to:  
   
    consolidate and further develop the understanding of international financial reporting standards and its application in Chinese accounting systems   
    understand and apply financial reporting principles and techniques in corporate finance decision making situations, particularly in the Chinese investment and finance   
    understand the nature, purpose and scope of audit arrangements including the role of the external audit and its regulatory and ethical framework   
    demonstrate the understanding of the entity and its environment, assess the risk of material misstatement and perform audit planning of financial statements with particular reference to the Chinese companies   
    encourage students to contribute to the lecture and tutorial discussions and debates, and to help them design, structure and research their own learning of financial reporting and auditing issues of Chinese and international dimensions  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Advanced Quantitative Methods and IT Skills for Business 
  
  
   This module applies descriptive statistics and inferential statistics to economics and business, including data collection, pictures of data, summarising data, probability, confidence intervals, sampling, random variables, sample distribution, hypothesis testing and linear model estimation of cross-section data. The emphasis is on practical application of these techniques rather than on the study of statistics and econometrics.  
   The module aims to:  
   
    develop key mathematical, statistical and econometric techniques and their application to problems and data  
    develop basic skills in the use of econometric software package for model estimation using real world data and interpret the results  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Financial Strategy in China 
  
  
   This module offers specialist understanding and appreciation of financial management for the medium and larger sized organisations - in the Chinese financial, legal and regulatory environment. It builds upon certain elements of the Financial Management unit, but the emphasis is on adopting a more strategic approach to corporate financing, in the Chinese marketplace.  
   The module aims are to:  
   
    consolidate and further develop an understanding - in the Chinese context - of corporate financial strategic issues and concepts building on, or supplemental to, the Financial Strategy unit and providing a solid base for the specialist units   
    understand and apply financial strategy principles and techniques particularly in Chinese investments and finance   
    appreciate the importance of the role of financial strategy decisions in Chinese and global markets, and to business strategy and corporate objectives   
    encourage students to contribute to the lecture and tutorial discussions and debates, and to help them design, structure and research their own learning of financial strategic issues of Chinese and international dimensions   
    undertake contemporary research into financial strategic decisions in China and their interactions within China and internationally  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Chinese Financial Markets 
  
  
   The module will make the students learnt the subjects sufficiently for further studies and further involvements in financial markets in or relating to China. Topics covered include:  
   
    The structure of the Chinese banking system   
    Chinese money markets   
    Chinese equity markets   
    Chinese futures markets   
    FX market   
    Bond market  
    Insurance sector   
    Mortgage market and mortgage instruments   
    Chinese regulations  
   
   The aims of the module are first to provide foundational level of knowledge to the roles and functions of a financial market, as well as how financial markets are structured to achieved the functions. Then we lead the students into the Chinese financial market environment to make the students familiar with the particular institutional characters in China.  
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   China's Political Economy 
  
  
   This module examines the interaction between politics and economy in China during the economic reform period from 1978 onward. Particular attention will be given to the progress and periods of China's reform, the political context of major economic policies, reform of major aspects of the economy, evolution of economic institutions, as well as an overview of economic development in China prior to 1978.  
   The module will highlight the role of the political factors and state policies in China’s economy, which is important for a good understanding of the reform and economic development in China.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    enhance students' understanding of the relationship between politics and economics in contemporary China and how politics affects economic policies in China   
    familiarize students with debates and empirical materials that are used in explaining changes in China's political economy   
    provide a programme that facilitates progressive learning in the disciplines of Political Economy and Chinese Studies   
    foster students' cultural awareness and understanding of a populous developing nation and economy   
    provide a programme that facilitates students' progressive learning in the disciplines of Political Economy and Chinese Studies  
    enhance students' understanding of the theoretical debates and empirical materials that are used in explaining the inter-relationship of politics and economics in contemporary China   
    practise and develop students' intellectual and transferable vocational skills   
    foster students' cultural awareness  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Economics of Strategy and Applications 
  
  
   This module applies theories and models on business and corporate strategy to a wide variety of firms and organisations, including some real examples related to China. Main topics include:  
   
    The business environment   
    Strategic capabilities   
    Business strategy   
    Diversification   
    Internationalisation   
    Mergers, acquisitions and alliances  
    Innovation   
    Evaluation  
   
   The module aims to:  
   
    develop students' ability to apply theories and models in economics of strategy to undertake effective strategic planning   
    enhance students' understanding of the changing external and internal business environment and their impact on strategic planning and implementation in contemporary China   
    foster students' research skills and team spirit through the writing of a long group project report  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Political Economy of China 
  
  
   This module introduces students to the major topics in China's interaction with and role in international political economy (IPE). It includes useful concepts and theories in IPE, the evolution of China’s ties with international political economy since 1949, the linkage between domestic and international political economy of China and players in the making of external political economic policies in China.  
   It also examines China's role in international economic regimes (such as the WTO) and in the global and regional orders of political economy. It provides a survey of the political economy of China’s ties with the major powers and regions such as the US, East Asia, and major oil producing nations.  
   This module aims at enabling students to develop an understanding of the role China plays in international political economy and think critically issues related to this topic.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Mandarin Chinese for the Advanced Level 
  
  
   Mandarin modules are available from beginners’ (Level 1) to research (Level 5). Students are assessed and placed at the appropriate level of study.   
   Please note: Native speakers of Mandarin will take Advanced English for Disciplinary Study modules instead of Mandarin.  
   Module content is as follows:  
   
    Studies on accuracy of grammar on times and changes, and connectors and discourse markers in spoken and written Chinese  
    Vocabulary related to physical features, personalities, human social behaviours, economic developments and basic statistics   
    Language functions for relating experiences, describing physical features, making generalisations, defining historic personalities and celebrities and describing changes, etc.   
   
   The aim of this module is to build on the practical language experiences gained previously, to consolidate and extend vocabulary, to increase comprehension, to reinforce grammatical accuracy and to develop a fluent command of written and spoken Mandarin Chinese.  
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year four modules  
  Core  
 
   Dissertation 
  
  
   This is an individual dissertation project based on a Chinese studies topic to be agreed by the candidate and the dissertation tutor (module convenor) and specialist supervisor.  
   The module aims to:  
   
    develop skills of problem recognition and definition  
    raise awareness of and responding to the ethical issues related to gathering data  
    implement risk assessment skills related to fieldwork and developing a culture of safety and appropriate research practices  
    have the opportunity to develop and apply research design and investigation skills in a field-based environment  
    enhance skills of information collection and synthesis, and the ability to evaluate the significance and relevance of information  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Methods for Business and Finance 
  
  
   
    Using applications to China  
    Differences between qualitative and quantitative research methods  
    Basic data handling  
    Correlation  
    Simple regression  
    Statistical aspects of regression  
    Multiple regression and hypothesis testing  
    Regression with lagged explanatory variable  
    Regression with dummy variables   
   
   The module aims to develop students' abilities to formulate researchable questions within a framework of financial economics, apply a statistical method to researching these problems and understand the relationship between theory testing and empirical evidence.  
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
 
   Chinese Bank Management 
  
  
   
    Overview of Chinese banking industry  
    Reform of the Chinese banking sector  
    Role of the Central Bank and the implementation of monetary policy  
    Performance of the Chinese banking sector and its future challenges  
    Measuring and evaluating the perfomance of banks  
    Managing the investment portfolios and liquidity positions of banks  
    Managing bank sources of funds  
    Provision of loans to buisnesses and consumers  
   
   This is a compulsory module for MSc Chinese Banking and Financial Markets in the background that the Chinese banking sectors have evolved into world class business - four of top ten largest banks in the world are now in China, and more various banks - commercial or investment banks, within China and from outside China are entering the business to provide financial services to the most dynamic economy in the world.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Chinese Financial Market Analysis 
  
  
   The course will apply advanced analytical techniques to financial markets in China and seek optimal strategies in theory and practices in solving the issues in the markets:  
   
    Financial market basics  
    Chinese money markets  
    Bond market  
    Chinese equity markets  
    Chinese futures markets  
    FX market  
    Private equity  
    Insurance sector  
    Chinese regulations  
   
   The course will focus on the theory and empirical evidence on the subject and will provide participants with a good general knowledge of how the various financial markets functions and act as a conduit between suppliers and users of capital, the regulatory environment in which they operate, their increasing interaction and what the future prospects and trends are likely to be.  
   The course also stresses the institutional differences in terms of market structure, practices, and legal and regulatory frameworks in Chinese financial markets.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Corporate Finance in China 
  
  
   This course offers specialist understanding and appreciation of financial management for the medium and larger sized organisations - in the Chinese financial, legal and regulatory environment. It builds upon certain elements of the Financial Management unit, but the emphasis is on adopting a more strategic approach to corporate financing, in the Chinese marketplace.   
   It is beneficial to the non specialist who wishes to acquire skills and understanding of key financial issues in Chinese financial system, but will very largely appeal to those wishing to be aware of the importance of financial management policy, or to those likely to pursue a career in banking, investment, treasury and finance more generally. It is both contemporary in nature and research based.  
   The modules aims are to:  
   
    consolidate and further develop an understanding - in the Chinese context - of company financial management issues and concepts building on, or supplemental to, the Financial Management unit and providing a solid base for the specialist units  
    understand and apply financial management principles and techniques in corporate finance decision making situations, particularly in the Chinese investment and finance  
    appreciate the importance of the role of financial management decisions in Chinese and global markets, and to business strategy and corporate objectives  
    encourage students to contribute to the lecture and tutorial discussions and debates, and to help them design, structure and research their own learning of financial management issues of Chinese and international dimensions  
    undertake contemporary research into a financial management decision in China and their interactions within China and internationally  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Further Issues on Accounting and Decision Making in China 
  
  
   
    Introduction to accounting  
    Financial statement analysis   
    Consolidation of financial statements  
    Advanced investment appraisal   
    Corporate failure, reconstruction and non-financial performance measurement  
    Financial performance measurement   
   
   The aim of this module is to train the students with solid understanding of general accounting foundation at the Masters level, as well as the Chinese accounting systems. This course is divided into two parts. The first part covers Chinese financial accounting and the second Chinese management accounting. Both financial and management accounting deal with economic events and both involve financial statements.   
   It is essential that managers understand that the significant differences between financial and management accounting arise because they serve different audiences. The financial aspects of the business permeate most areas of management.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Human Resource Management and Industrial Relations in China 
  
  
   The module aims to develop students' knowledge and understanding of the theory and practice of HRM and industrial relations in China during the reform era across enterprises in all ownership sectors.   
   HRM is a crucial element of industrial relations, by providing the students sound understanding of theory concerning collective relationship between employees and employers, and the role of union and non-union in representation of employees through the examination of practical issues such as collective bargaining, grievance, and industrial actions.  
   This module aims to provide students generic understanding of main elements in industrial relations, from employee/employer relationship to government/business relationship, then more broadly, to the dynamic interaction between local state and society. Within industrial relations, the HRM is a crucial part so the module will also introduce the practice and operation of HRM.   
   This module pays specific attention on the China market, especially the state/market relationship after 1978 economic reform.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Law, Market and Society in China 
  
  
   The lecture/seminar examines legal developments in China in the context of China's construction of a market economy and of China's participation into globalization since 1978. It focuses on particular aspects of legal development in China's making of a market economy. Based upon social-legal theoretical frameworks it aims to evaluate the transformation of the relationship among the state, law and market economy in China.  
   The module aims to develop students' knowledge and understanding of the relationships among state, law and market economy of China in the reform era. It complements other taught-postgraduate modules on China’s management and business, history, politics, economic development, and culture and society.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Marketing Management in China and Emerging Markets 
  
  
   The module covers the following main topics:  
   
    Understanding marketing management in China and emerging markets  
    Capturing marketing insights  
    Connecting with customers  
    Building strong brands  
    Shaping the market offerings  
    Delivering value  
    Communicating value  
    Creating successful long-term growth   
   
   The module aims to develop students' knowledge and understanding of the theory and practice of marketing management in China and emerging markets.