Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Learning History 
   
   
    This module will provide you with the learning skills necessary to make the most of your studies in history. You will be introduced to different approaches in the study of history as well as to different understandings of the functions served by engagement with the past. The module aims to encourage more effective learning, bridge the transition from school or college to university, prepare you for more advanced work in the discipline, and enhance the skills listed. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Understanding Global Politics 
   
   
    This module introduces global politics through the major theoretical, historical and empirical ways of seeing international relations. We consider how different approaches understand global politics, the role of different actors in global politics and different approaches to organising international relations. In particular the module highlights the major issues of war and peace, and global poverty. There is a mix of lectures, seminars and workshops on different weeks totalling around three hours per week throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Modern Political Theory 
   
   
    This module introduces students to the ideas of some of the canonical thinkers in the history of political thought, such as Burke, Rousseau, Kant, Mill, and Marx. The module considers the impact of these thinkers on modern political thought and practice, with reference to key political ideas and historical developments (such as liberty and equality, and the Enlightenment). The course will be text based. There is a mix of lectures and seminars totalling around three hours per week throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Comparative Politics 
   
   
    In this module you will compare and contrast the decision-making structures of modern states by examining different topics such as Democratic and Authoritarian Rule, Political Culture and Legal and Constitutional Frameworks. You will also be introduced to the method of comparative politics and theory testing. There is a mix of lectures, seminars and workshops on different weeks totalling around three hours per week throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
   
   And one of the following two modules:  
  
    British Political History since 1945 
   
   
    The module will introduce and interrogate British political history since 1945. The module will take students through key issues and controversies in post-war British politics and as they relate to leaders and governments (in lectures) and key debates over controversies (in seminars). The module will explore a range of issues relating to economic policy, social policy and the welfare state, industrial relations, foreign and defence policy, Europe, local government and nuclear deterrence. Seminars will employ a range of activity-based scenarios to develop student understanding of key crises experienced by leaders and governments since 1945 There is a mix of lectures and seminars totalling around two hours per week throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Problems in Global Politics 
   
   
    For this module, students will explore a range of issues in contemporary international relations. It focuses on the problems of security and insecurity since the end of the Cold War. You will learn to develop critical and reflective thinking using a variety of approaches and methods related to the study of global politics. You will have three hours of lectures, seminars and workshops per week studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Introduction to the Medieval World, 500–1500 
   
   
    This module provides an introduction to medieval European history in the period 500–1500. It offers a fresh and stimulating approach to the major forces instrumental in the shaping of politics, society and culture in Europe. Through a series of thematically linked lectures and seminars, you will be introduced to key factors determining changes in the European experience over time, as well as important continuities linking the period as a whole. Amongst the topics to be considered are: political structures and organisation; social and economic life and cultural developments. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Reformation to Revolution: an introduction to early modern history, 1500–1789 
   
   
    This module introduces you to major issues in the social, political and cultural history of Europe in the early modern period by analysing demographic, religious, social and cultural changes that took place between 1500 and 1789. You will examine the tensions produced by warfare, religious conflict, the changing relationships between rulers, subjects and political elites, trends in socio-economic development and the discovery of the ‘New World’. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Roads to Modernity: an introduction to modern history, 1789–1945  
   
   
    In the first semester, the module provides a chronology of modern history from c.1789–1945 which concentrates principally on key political developments in European and global history such as the French Revolution, the expansion of the European empires and the two World Wars. The second semester will look more broadly at economic, social and cultural issues, such as industrialisation, urbanisation, changing artistic forms and ideological transformations in order to consider the nature of modernity. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    History and Politics: A problem or solution? 
   
   
    This unique and innovative module invites students to think for themselves about the relationship between two seemingly different disciplines, both theoretically and empirically, by encouraging them to reflect on broader conceptual and methodological issues and then apply these to their own understanding of the concept of ‘consensus’ as it is often applied to post-war British history. The module has two principal functions. First, it provides students with an understanding of various methodological approaches that have been applied to the study of political phenomena. In doing so, it will encourage them to develop a more sophisticated critical engagement with the arguments that they encounter. Second, it enhances students’ understanding of some of the concepts that are central to the study of history and politics. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
   
   And one of the following two modules:  
  
    Approaches to Political Studies 
   
   
    The module introduces students to alternative theoretical approaches to the study of political phenomena. We consider the different forms of analysing, explaining, and understanding politics associated with approaches such as behaviouralism, rational choice theory, institutionalism, Marxism, feminism, interpretive theory and post-modernism. There is a mix of lectures, seminars and workshops on different weeks totalling around three hours per week throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Designing Political Research 
   
   
    This module will help students to understand some of the key methods used by professional researchers who work in the areas of politics and international relations. We give you hands-on experience in research skills relevant to undertaking projects in politics and international relations, many of which will be useful to you in your future careers. There is a mix of lectures, seminars and computer labs on different weeks totalling around four hours per week throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Heroes and Villains in the Middle Ages 
   
   
    The module compares and contrasts key historical, legendary and fictional figures to examine the development of western medieval values and ideologies such as monasticism, chivalry and kingship. It explores how individuals shaped ideal types and how they themselves strove to match medieval archetypes. The binary oppositions between ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are explored through study of the ‘bad king’, and the creation of villains such as the Jew. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Crusades 
   
   
    This module addresses evidence for crusader motivation and experience through sources relating to crusading activity in Europe and the Middle East from the late eleventh century to the mid-13th century. It seeks to understand how crusaders saw themselves and their enemies, their experiences and activity on crusade and as settlers, and how this horrifying yet enduringly fascinating process has been interpreted historically. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Venetian Republic, 1450–1575 
   
   
    This module explores the nature of the Venetian Republic in the later 15th and 16th centuries. It examines the constitution, its administrative and judicial system, its imperial and military organisation, but will above all focus on the city and its inhabitants itself. The module will discuss the enormous cultural dynamism of the city (especially the visual arts from the Bellini to Tintoretto and Veronese), changing urban fabric, the role of ritual and ceremony, the position of the Church, and class and gender. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    De-Industrialisation: A Social and Cultural History, 1970–1990 
   
   
    This module examines the social and cultural impact of economic change in three traditional industrial regions in the UK, Germany and the US in the 1970s and 1980s. It takes thematic approaches, exploring topics including: overlaps and differences between Contemporary History and the Social Sciences; change and decline in traditional industries such as coal, steel and shipbuilding; political responses to industrial change, with a particular focus on industrial conflict over closures, among others. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Soviet State and Society 
   
   
    This module examines political, social and economic transformations in the Soviet Union from the October Revolution of 1917 to Gorbachev’s attempted reforms and the collapse of the state in 1991. You will look at Russia both from the top down (state-building strategies; leadership and regime change; economic and social policy formulation and implementation) and from the bottom up (societal developments and the changing structures and practices of everyday life). You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
      
   You will also attend a non-assessed weekly lecture module throughout the year called ‘Doing History’. This builds on the first-year core module Learning History and aims to develop your awareness of the craft of the historian, developing essential skills to get the most out of your second-year options and enabling you to determine what sort of historian you are. It also operates as a bridge to your third and final year, permitting you to make informed decisions about your choice of Special Subject, third-year options, and dissertation.  
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Dissertation 
   
   
    This module involves the in-depth study of a historical subject from which you will create a 10,000 word dissertation. You will have regular meetings with your supervisor and a weekly one hour lecture to guide you through this task. You can also choose a topic in politics instead.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Politics and Drugs 
   
   
    This module examines the implications of narcotics abuse for the political system from both a national and international perspective. Contemporary British drug policy will be the explored and questions raised by drug control policy will be discussed. You will consider the production, consumption and trade of drugs as a global problem. You will spend around three hours a week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Weapons of Mass Destruction 
   
   
    This module introduces a range of debates concerning weapons of mass destruction (WMD) to give you an appreciation of the importance of the issue. The reasons for states to develop or acquire WMDs will be explored through core concepts such as deterrence, the security dilemma and organisation theory.  You will discuss whether WMDs are good or bad and if Britain should build a missile defence system among other topics. Three hours a week are spent in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Samurai Revolution: Reinventing Japan, 1853–78 
   
   
    This module surveys the dramatic cultural encounter in the 19th century as the world of the samurai was confronted by Western expansion and the Age of Steam. It explores the forces at work in Japan’s rapid transformation from an ‘ancien r&eacute;gime’ under the rule of the Shogun into a ‘modern’ imperial power. Original documents examined in class draw on the growing range of Japanese primary sources available in English translation, together with the extensive works of Victorian diplomats, newspaper correspondents and other foreign residents in the treaty ports. Three hours a week are spent in lectures and seminars for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Italy at War, 1935–45 
   
   
    Spending three hours per week in seminars and tutorials, you will be given a framework to understand the experience of Italians (and to a lesser degree their enemies, allies, and collaborators) during the military conflicts in the long decade 1935–45, as well as knowledge of the background factors that shaped these experiences. As source material you will have the chance to explore diplomatic correspondence, personal memoirs, newspapers and magazines, newsreels, as well as examining the representation of the war in literature and cinema.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Kings, Saints and Monsters in England, 450–850 
   
   
    This module examines cultural and political changes in the southern half of the island of Britain between the fifth and ninth centuries, in particular the development of kingship and kingdoms as a form of political organisation, and the effects of the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity. You will spend three hours in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Racial State to Reconstruction: women and gender relations in Germany, 1939–45 
   
   
    This module adopts a perspective of women's and gender history to explore the history of Germany in the period from the beginning of the National Socialist dictatorship up to the division of Germany into two post-war states in 1949. It will examine National Socialist discourses, policies and practices in relation to women and gender relations by drawing on records of public authorities and institutions concerned with educating and training the female population in line with Nazi precepts, mobilizing labour for the Nazi war economy, sustaining home front morale, and combating ‘threats to the race’. Three hours a week are spent in lectures and seminars for this module.