Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer.   
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Learning History 
   
   
    This module will provide you with the learning skills necessary to make the most of your studies in history. You will be introduced to different approaches in the study of history as well as to different understandings of the functions served by engagement with the past. The module aims to encourage more effective learning, bridge the transition from school or college to university, prepare you for more advanced work in the discipline, and enhance the skills listed. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the Medieval World, 500–1500 
   
   
    This module provides an introduction to medieval European history in the period 500–1500. It offers a fresh and stimulating approach to the major forces instrumental in the shaping of politics, society and culture in Europe. Through a series of thematically linked lectures and seminars, you will be introduced to key factors determining changes in the European experience over time, as well as important continuities linking the period as a whole. Amongst the topics to be considered are: political structures and organization; social and economic life and cultural developments. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Reformation to Revolution: an introduction to early modern history: 1500–1789 
   
   
    This module introduces you to major issues in the social, political and cultural history of Europe in the early modern period by analysing demographic, religious, social and cultural changes that took place between 1500 and 1789. You will examine the tensions produced by warfare, religious conflict, the changing relationships between rulers, subjects and political elites, trends in socio-economic development and the discovery of the ‘New World’. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Roads to Modernity: an introduction to modern history: 1789–1945 
   
   
    In the first semester, the module provides a chronology of modern history from c.1789–1945 which concentrates principally on key political developments in European and global history such as the French Revolution, the expansion of the European empires and the two World Wars. The second semester will look more broadly at economic, social and cultural issues, such as industrialisation, urbanisation, changing artistic forms and ideological transformations in order to consider the nature of modernity. You will usually spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Political Ideas in Revolution 
   
   
    You will be introduced to some of the founding fathers of political thought such as Aristotle, Plato, Machiavelli and Hobbes. The evolution of political thought such as the concepts of liberty, equality and the Enlightenment will also be examined. You will consider their impact on modern political thought and practice, bringing together key political ideas with historical development. In this module you will have two hours of lectures per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Approaches to Film and Television 
   
   
    This module provides you with fundamental concepts in the study of film and television. It introduces key terms and investigates principal work roles within the industry. You will develop a critical approach to the analysis of film and television media, spending around five hours a week in workshops and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Roman Archaeology 
   
   
    This module provides an introduction to the archaeology of the Roman Empire. It traces the development of the Roman world and examines the archaeology of the Empire's provinces, including Britain. Specific themes in this course include town, villas and the countryside, and housing the army among other related topics. For this module you will have a combination of lecture and seminars over the course of eight weeks.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    The Contemporary World 
   since 1945 
   
   
    The module surveys and analyses some of the main developments in world affairs since the end of the Second World War. This includes major international events, particularly the course and aftermath of the Cold War, as well as national and regional histories, especially in Europe, East Asia and the Middle East; the module also looks at key political and social movements. Attention is paid to political, economic and social forces. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Heroes and Villains in the Middle Ages 
   
   
    The module compares and contrasts key historical, legendary and fictional figures to examine the development of western medieval values and ideologies such as monasticism, chivalry and kingship. It explores how individuals shaped ideal types and how they themselves strove to match medieval archetypes. The binary oppositions between ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are explored through study of the ‘bad king’, and the creation of villains such as the Jew. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Crusades 
   
   
    This module addresses evidence for crusader motivation and experience through sources relating to crusading activity in Europe and the Middle East from the late eleventh century to the mid-13th century. It seeks to understand how crusaders saw themselves and their enemies, their experiences and activity on crusade and as settlers, and how this horrifying yet enduringly fascinating process has been interpreted historically. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Venetian Republic: 1450–1575 
   
   
    This module explores the nature of the Venetian Republic in the later 15th and 16th centuries. It examines the constitution, its administrative and judicial system, its imperial and military organisation, but will above all focus on the city and its inhabitants itself. The module will discuss the enormous cultural dynamism of the city (especially the visual arts from the Bellini to Tintoretto and Veronese), changing urban fabric, the role of ritual and ceremony, the position of the Church, and class and gender. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    De-industrialisation: A Social and Cultural History, 1970–1990 
   
   
    This module examines the social and cultural impact of economic change in three traditional industrial regions in the UK, Germany and the US in the 1970s and 1980s. It takes thematic approaches, exploring topics including: overlaps and differences between Contemporary History and the Social Sciences; change and decline in traditional industries such as coal, steel and shipbuilding; political responses to industrial change, with a particular focus on industrial conflict over closures, among others. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Soviet State and Society 
   
   
    This module examines political, social and economic transformations in the Soviet Union from the October Revolution of 1917 to Gorbachev’s attempted reforms and the collapse of the state in 1991. You will look at Russia both from the top down (state-building strategies; leadership and regime change; economic and social policy formulation and implementation) and from the bottom up (societal developments and the changing structures and practices of everyday life). You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Race, Rights and Propaganda: the superpowers, the Cold War, and the politics of racial identity, 1945–89 
   
   
    The Cold War was a conflict defined as much by intellectual and cultural struggle as by conventional military means, diplomacy, or realpolitik. Conceptions of race and identity were by no means immune from this, but heavily disputed and contested in the political environment of the Cold War. This module examines how the two superpowers dealt with issues of race and identity during the Cold War years, confronting questions and challenges from both within their own borders (and each other’s) and in several theatres of superpower conflict – including the Middle East, East Asia and post-colonial Africa. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
      
   You will also attend a non-assessed weekly lecture module throughout the year called ‘Doing History’. This builds on the first-year core module Learning History and aims to develop your awareness of the craft of the historian, developing essential skills to get the most out of your second-year options and enabling you to determine what sort of historian you are. It also operates as a bridge to your third and final year, permitting you to make informed decisions about your choice of Special Subject, third-year options, and dissertation.  
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Dissertation 
   
   
    This module involves the in-depth study of a historical subject from which you will create a 10,000 word dissertation. You will have regular meetings with your supervisor and a weekly one hour lecture to guide you through this task.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Kings, Saints and Monsters in England, 450–850 
   
   
    This module examines cultural and political changes in the southern half of the island of Britain between the fifth and ninth centuries, in particular the development of kingship and kingdoms as a form of political organisation, and the effects of the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity. You will spend three hours in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Italy at War, 1935–45 
   
   
    Spending three hours per week in seminars and tutorials, you will be given a framework to understand the experience of Italians (and to a lesser degree their enemies, allies, and collaborators) during the military conflicts in the long decade 1935–45, as well as knowledge of the background factors that shaped these experiences. As source material you will have the chance to explore diplomatic correspondence, personal memoirs, newspapers and magazines, newsreels, as well as examining the representation of the war in literature and cinema.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Samurai Revolution: Reinventing Japan, 1853–78 
   
   
    This module surveys the dramatic cultural encounter in the 19th century as the world of the samurai was confronted by Western expansion and the Age of Steam. It explores the forces at work in Japan’s rapid transformation from an ‘ancien r&eacute;gime’ under the rule of the Shogun into a ‘modern’ imperial power. Original documents examined in class draw on the growing range of Japanese primary sources available in English translation, together with the extensive works of Victorian diplomats, newspaper correspondents and other foreign residents in the treaty ports. You will have three hours of seminars and lectures for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Racial State to Reconstruction: women and gender relations in Germany, 1939-45 
   
   
    This module adopts a perspective of women's and gender history to explore the history of Germany in the period from the beginning of the National Socialist dictatorship up to the division of Germany into two post-war states in 1949. It will examine National Socialist discourses, policies and practices in relation to women and gender relations by drawing on records of public authorities and institutions concerned with educating and training the female population in line with Nazi precepts, mobilizing labour for the Nazi war economy, sustaining home front morale, and combating ‘threats to the race’. You will have three hours of seminars and lectures for this module.