Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Introduction to Art History I 
   
   
    This module introduces you to issues surrounding the making, display, and the act of collecting art objects in different media. You will examine the ways in which these objects were created, factors that led to their creation and the impact of the material condition of the object on its interpretation. In addition, you will develop study and writing skills relevant to the analysis of works of art in a variety of media and across a variety of historical and geographical backgrounds. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one 2-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Art History II 
   
   
    This core module builds on the foundation laid in Introduction to Art History I in the autumn semester. You will examine the interpretation of objects by considering different forms of writing on art, including art-historical texts, and their changing preoccupations, whilst extending your writing and study skills. In addition, there will be visits to local art collections where possible. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one 2-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
    For English, you will need to choose three out of four modules  
  
    Language and Context 
   
   
    This module considers the main forms and functions of English vocabulary, grammar and discourse and explores how they are used in real social and cultural contexts. You’ll look at how language is used for different purposes and how people use language to reveal and conceal social realities as well other topics surrounding language and context. For this module you will have a one hour lecture and a one-hour seminar per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Beginnings of English 
   
   
    You will be introduced to the language, literature and culture of medieval England and study texts from the Old and Middle English texts. In this module you’ll familiarise yourself with the knowledge needed for reading and understanding medieval texts. In addition you will be introduced to the basics of medieval grammar and spelling conventions. For this module you’ll have two 1-hour lectures and one 1-hour seminar per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Studying Literature 
   
   
    This module will introduce some of the core skills necessary for studying literary studies through focusing on specific poetry and prose texts. You’ll address topics including: close reading, constructing an argument and handling critical material. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Drama, Theatre, Performance 
   
   
    For this module you’ll explore the variety of drama in the western dramatic tradition. You’ll consider some of the following: theatre of ancient Greece, medieval mystery and morality plays, the drama of Shakespeare and the Restoration, and nineteenth century naturalism. For this module you’ll study selected plays but also explore 20th century interpretations of the texts through use of video extracts. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, workshops and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Matisse, Picasso, Duchamp 
   
   
    In this module, you will study developments in art in Paris between 1905 and the outbreak of the First World War. The primary focus is on painting, though you will also investigate the relationships between painting and sculpture, and between the art object and non-art. Taking in the competing versions of figure composition in the works of Matisse, Derain and Picasso, you will go on to consider the 'Private Cubism' of Picasso and Braque alongside the so-called 'Salon Cubism' of Delauney, Metzinger and Gleizes. The teaching programme consists of one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Inventing French Art: From the Renaissance to Louis XIV  
   
   
    This module aims to give an overview of French art in the 16th and 17th centuries, examining the functions of art and architecture against social, political and institutional contexts such as the royal court, the Acad&eacute;mie, the growth of Paris and the invention of a national artistic tradition. The teaching is delivered through one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Art Power: Paris 1937 
   
   
    This module focuses on the International Exhibition in Paris in 1937, which provides a survey of art in the service of politics in the years preceding World War II. Participating countries - including the USSR, Germany, Italy, and Spain - were represented by national pavilions combining art and architecture to articulate national values and ambitions. The cultural battles between contrasting styles of state sponsored art, such as Soviet Socialist Realism and German Neoclassicism, will be examined in light of political and military conflicts in a Europe divided by the Spanish Civil War. Important individual works, such as Picasso's Guernica, will be considered alongside the pavilions as unified artworks. The module consists of one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Plural Art Histories 
   
   
    In this module, you will examine selected pieces of art, architecture, and drama from classical Greece, China, Europe, colonial and postcolonial Americas, with some reference to contemporary examples, in order to explore some fundamental questions about art, such as: what is the relationship between creators and the world in which they live? How are the arts made, used, and regarded? In each case, the production and reception of the arts is studied through a contextual approach, paying attention to political, economic, religious, and cultural factors. The module consists of one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Art in America 1945-80 
   
   
    This module introduces and examines some of the major themes and movements to emerge in American art after 1945, including Abstract Expressionism, Neo-Dada, Pop Art, and Conceptual Art. You will consider the historical and cultural contexts of art in a range of media, including painting, sculpture, installation and performance. You will look at some of the key critical responses to American modern art, and investigate the extent to which post-1945 practices were radically new or whether they were informed by awareness of pre-war and/or European avant-garde practices. For this module you will have a single 1-hour lecture and a single 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Courts and Princes in Renaissance Italy, 1450-1520 
   
   
    This module examines painting, architecture and sculpture at the courts of Ferrara, Mantua, Naples, Urbino and Milan in the period 1420-1520 and suggests that the small princely courts of Italy played an important role in shaping ‘the Renaissance’. Princes at courts competed for the services of the 'best' artists, and Leonardo da Vinci, Pisanello, Piero della Francesca and Andrea Mantegna are just some of the masters who worked for these Courts. This module draws both on established literature, but also seeks to incorporate more recent research questions regarding gender, material culture etc. As such, this module introduces students to questions that will be developed further in modules in second and third year.    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
    English Options   You must choose three modules in English covering at least two of the following areas:  
   Literature 1500 to the present Each of the modules offered will provide a comprehensive introduction to the changes in the genres of prose, poetry and drama across the period studied, placing the works encountered in the context of key aesthetic, social and political/historical contexts.  
   English Language and Applied Linguistics Building on the study of English language undertaken in year one, your second year language modules provide the exciting opportunity for you to explore aspects of language use in the mind, in society and in literature.  
   Medieval languages and literatures You can choose to pursue one or more of the medieval areas introduced in year one, or you can opt to study a new but related area. In all cases you will develop your understanding of language change and variety, registers, styles, modes and genres, as they appear in medieval texts, and become more expert in reading with reference to wider medieval cultures.  
   Drama and Performance Year two modules provide the opportunity to develop approaches from the first year by studying 20th and 21st-century theatre; by exploring key critical approaches to drama in theory and practice, and by focusing on a key period in the development of our nation’s theatre.  
   For a sample of typical modules from each area please see our single honours BA English  listing .  
   Optional  
  
    Work and Play in Modern European Art 1750 - 1900 
   
   
    This module considers representations of leisure and labour from the mid-eighteenth century to the early twentieth. With particular attention paid to the activities available to women during this period, you will consider the ideological and material conditions of industrialization, migration, urban life, and entertainment and their impact on the fundamental activities of work and play. The module consists of one 2-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Los Angeles Art and Architecture: 1945-85 
   
   
    In this module, you will be introduced to a number of artistic and architectural practices that emerged in Southern California after 1945. You will also explore the cultural and historical context of a number of artistic practices, as well as the role of Los Angeles in the development of post-1945 American art and architecture, including mid-century modernism, Pop Art, Conceptual Art and Light & Space Art. A central question in this module will be whether all art made in Los Angeles can be classified as ‘Los Angeles Art’. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Women in the Italian Renaissance 1500-1600: Art and History 
   
   
    The first part of this module will provide an introduction to women's history in the later medieval and early modern Italian context, looking at the domestic and political roles of women in the light of gender and sexuality. The second part of the module looks at the role of Renaissance women in the art of the period. Examining diverse visual evidence (such as painted furniture and funerary epigraphs), classes will focus on themes including the role of Biblical and patristic writings in shaping attitudes towards women, the role of the family and marriage in fashioning gender relations, and women as patrons and producers of art. The teaching is delivered through one 1-hour lecture and one 2-hour seminar each week.   
   
  
      
   
   
  
    Art at the Tudor Courts, 1485-1603 
   
  
    This course will provide an introduction to visual art at the Tudor courts, from the accession of Henry VII in 1485 to the death of Elizabeth I in 1603. In doing so, it takes account of a wide range of art forms, from portraiture to pageantry, jewellery to the book. Key issues dealt with in lectures and seminars include contemporary theories of visuality and monarchy, the particular context of court culture, and the use of visual material in the service of self -fashioning. It considers the impact of major historical developments including the reformation and the advent of print. As such, the relationship of the arts to politics is a key theme. Through exploring the highly sophisticated uses of visual art at the Tudor courts, the course seeks to re-evaluate the common idea that English art at the time was isolationist and inferior to that of continental Europe.   
   
  
      
   
   
  
    Futurism 
   
  
    This module explores the Italian Futurist movement as a pioneering project in multimedia experimentation, which included painting, sculpture, architecture, design, photography, film, performance, typography, literature, and music. It will investigate the movement’s apparent rejection of Italy’s cultural heritage and celebration of 20th century technology, from the speed of the motorcar to the violence of modern warfare. The political objectives of the Futurists will be considered, including the movement’s complex relationship with Fascism. The publicity strategies of the group, such as the extensive use of manifestoes and provocative public interventions, will also be examined. The module will cover the period from Futurism’s headline-grabbing conception in 1909 through to the end of its second manifestation in the 1940s. 
   
  
      
   
    
   
   British Romantic Art 
   
  
    In this module, you will examine aspects of the development of British art between 1790-1850. Individual artists such as Blake, Turner, and Constable, will be studied in the context of the organisation of the London art world, the cultural consequences of British isolation during the wars of the Revolution and Empire, and the establishment of a British canon. Themes addressed may include the apocalyptic, scientific method and radical naturalism, and industry and the supernatural. The module consists of one 2-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Realism and Impressionism, 1840-1890 
   
  
    This module examines two of the most influential movements in Western art, Realism and Impressionism. We will consider the major figures and critical debates in the history of modern art. Among the artists to be studied are Courbet, Bonheur, Millet, Manet, Morisot, Degas, Cassatt, Renoir, and others. This module includes the study of different critical approaches to the study of art works and visual culture. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Optional  
  
    Dissertation in Art History  
   
   
    The module involves an in-depth, semester-long study (or year-long study) of an art historical topic of your choice following consultation with a tutor and approval from the module convener/ Head of Department. The module convener will allocate a tutor in consultation with the student, dependent on the availability of staff. By the end, you will have demonstrated skill in researching and managing information, as well as having developed your written skills. There is a minimum requirement of two hours supervision with your tutor, with further time allocated at their discretion. Regular attendance at tutorials/workshops is a requirement for the completion of this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    European Avant-Garde Film 
   
   
    This module examines avant-garde cinema in early 20th century Europe. It will begin by exploring what is meant by the term ‘avant-garde’ and considering the development of experimental filmmaking in the context of artistic movements such as Futurism, Cubism, Dada, Surrealism and Constructivism. You will focus on developments in Germany, France and the Soviet Union during the 1920s and 1930s, and consider key trends from abstract animation to cinema pur. The module will highlight some key concerns of non-mainstream cinema such as narrative, abstraction, reflexivity, spectatorship, movement, time and space. You will also examine the engagement of experimental film with modernity, considering both aesthetic and political strategies of the European avant-gardes. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Landscape in Britain since 1800 
   
   
    This module is concerned with the landscape as a genre in Britain over a period of two centuries, and will investigate representations across a range of media, from painting and watercolour to photography and film. Key themes include: landscape, pleasure and anxiety, the tourist viewpoint, nostalgia and modernity, environmental and land art, new forms of landscapes practice, and ruin, waste and change. For this module you will have one 1-hour and one 2-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Renaissance Luxuries: Art and Good Living in Italy 1400 - 1600 
   
   
    This module seeks to engage with the Renaissance as a period of conspicuous consumption of a range of luxury goods, and examines the social, cultural and economic factors which characterised the period 1400-1600.  Amongst the issues raised in lectures and seminars will be the importance of objects as signifiers of status, magnificence, the diversification of objects and the attendant rise in specialised living arrangements, and women as consumers of art. In this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and a one 2-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    American Visual Cultures 
   
  
    The module examines the visual culture of America from the late 19th century to the present day. The module explores how visual culture – art, advertising, architecture, cinema, television, cartography, video, the internet and images of science – has transformed and shaped the image of the United States. The module looks closely at a series of themes: Urban and rural landscapes, icons and iconography, art and photography, race and gender in the US, high and low culture, sex and sexuality. The module also introduces various visual and critical theories which help us better understand the visual cultures of the United States.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Fascism, Spectacle and Display 
   
  
    This module will examine cultural production during Italy’s fascist regime. There will be an emphasis on the experience of visual culture in public settings such as the exhibition space, the cinema, and the built environment. A wide range of cultural artefacts will be examined, paying attention to material as well as visual aspects. Visual material will be situated in the social, cultural and political circumstances of the period. Key themes will include the tensions between tradition and modernity, and regionalism, nationalism, and internationalism. 
   
  
      
   
   
  
    Mobility and the Making of Modern Art 
   
  
    New technologies of mobility have long been a defining condition of modernity. It is from this perspective that we will examine modern art while highlighting the interrelated components of movement and speed – mechanized motion, temporality and their political connotations (e.g., social, ideological, artistic trends). This module includes a range of works, mainly paintings, from the mid nineteenth century to the early twentieth century. We will also consider photography and other pre-cinematic forms of moving images such as optical devices, peepshows, and panoramas that added different motion and time to representation. A key question is the role of artists in naturalizing the equation between mobility, modernity, and the West. To this end, our consideration will involve non-Western representations to explore the ideological and economic implications of mobility. 
   
  
      
   
   
  
    Performance Art 
   
  
    This module traces the development of performance art from the 1950s to the 1980s. It considers the work of a number of artists in America and Europe in terms of their focus on the body of the artist, the dematerialization of the art object, and the changing role of the audience or viewer. Students will engage with a range of theories of identity, gender and selfhood; phenomenology and participation; duration, temporality and impermanence pain, endurance and abjection. Exploring performance art’s relationship with other visual art forms, including dance, experimental music, film and television, this module considers and evaluates the art historical genealogies of performance art and body art and examines the ways in which performance art has shifted the terms of art history. In addition, it will consider the issues at stake in constructing a history of performance art, and in documenting, exhibiting, and writing about ephemeral, invisible, or indeterminate practices.   
   
  
      
   
      
   English Options  
   The final year is when all the different strands of your teaching and learning experience as an undergraduate culminate in the opportunity to demonstrate and apply all the different kinds of skills you have acquired in researching a topic, extended analysis of specialist themes and areas, and in independent study.   
  
    You will have the opportunity to study a range of authors, genres, linguistic approaches, and textual forms and contexts, in both national and international contexts, thinking about English in the broadest possible terms. You will also have the opportunity to specialise in areas for which you have developed genuine aptitude and passion during your undergraduate career. 
   
   
    
   
  
    A typical list of options available can be found on our single honours BA English 
   listing.