Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Learning History 
   
   
    This module will provide you with the learning skills necessary to make the most of your studies in history. You will be introduced to different approaches in the study of history as well as to different understandings of the functions served by engagement with the past. The module aims to encourage more effective learning, bridge the transition from school or college to university, prepare you for more advanced work in the discipline, and enhance the skills listed. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Contemporary China 
   
   
    This is an introductory course designed to provide students with an overview of contemporary China and help students establish a foundation of knowledge and skills to pursue more advanced studies of China in their later years of study. You will examine a variety of topics such as Chinese economy and politics, security and foreign relations, and Chinese media since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949 with particular attention paid to the changes in China since 1978. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    East Asian Business in the Twentieth Century 
   
   
    This module provides the historical background to key developments in the evolution of East Asian business and its impact on world business and trading patterns in recent decades. Issues covered include the history of Western business in Asia from colonial times to the post-Second World War period, the economic, political and social background to business development in key countries in the region including the emergence of Japan as Asia’s first industrialised nation, and the development paths of East Asia’s newly industrialised countries (NICs) from colonial rule into the 1980s. China’s post-1978 economic growth and business development and the 1997 Asian financial crisis are also discussed. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the Chinese Legal System 
   
   
    Studying this module you will gain an introduction to the origin, key elements and characteristics of the evolving Chinese legal system including the history of Chinese law, the organisation of the P.R. China as a state and its constitutional laws, the law making process in China, the legal institutions and the Chinese court system, the criminal process, and the civil process and legal profession in China. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Business and Economy of China 
   
   
    This module will provide fundamental knowledge of China’s economic transformation and business development, establishing an understanding of issues including economic strategies, industrial sector transformation, investment, trade and business management. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Reformation to Revolution: an introduction to early modern history, 1500–1789 
   
   
    This module introduces you to major issues in the social, political and cultural history of Europe in the early modern period by analysing demographic, religious, social and cultural changes that took place between 1500 and 1789. You will examine the tensions produced by warfare, religious conflict, the changing relationships between rulers, subjects and political elites, trends in socio-economic development and the discovery of the ‘New World’. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the Medieval World, 500–1500 
   
   
    This module provides an introduction to medieval European history in the period 500–1500. It offers a fresh and stimulating approach to the major forces instrumental in the shaping of politics, society and culture in Europe. Through a series of thematically linked lectures and seminars, you will be introduced to key factors determining changes in the European experience over time, as well as important continuities linking the period as a whole. Amongst the topics to be considered are: political structures and organisation; social and economic life and cultural developments. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Roads to Modernity: an introduction to modern history, 1789–1945 
   
   
    In the first semester, the module provides a chronology of modern history from c.1789–1945 which concentrates principally on key political developments in European and global history such as the French Revolution, the expansion of the European empires and the two World Wars. The second semester will look more broadly at economic, social and cultural issues, such as industrialisation, urbanisation, changing artistic forms and ideological transformations in order to consider the nature of modernity. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
     Compulsory  
  
    The Contemporary World since 1945 
   
   
    The module surveys and analyses some of the main developments in world affairs since the end of the Second World War. This includes major international events, particularly the course and aftermath of the Cold War, as well as national and regional histories, especially in Europe, East Asia and the Middle East; the module also looks at key political and social movements. Attention is paid to political, economic and social forces. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
     Optional  
  
    Heroes and Villains in the Middle Ages 
   
   
    The module compares and contrasts key historical, legendary and fictional figures to examine the development of western medieval values and ideologies such as monasticism, chivalry and kingship. It explores how individuals shaped ideal types and how they themselves strove to match medieval archetypes. The binary oppositions between ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are explored through study of the ‘bad king’, and the creation of villains such as the Jew. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Crusades 
   
   
    This module addresses evidence for crusader motivation and experience through sources relating to crusading activity in Europe and the Middle East from the late 11th century to the mid-13th century. It seeks to understand how crusaders saw themselves and their enemies, their experiences and activity on crusade and as settlers, and how this horrifying yet enduringly fascinating process has been interpreted historically. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Venetian Republic, 1450–1775 
   
   
    This module explores the nature of the Venetian Republic in the later 15th and 16th centuries. It examines the constitution, its administrative and judicial system, its imperial and military organisation, but will above all focus on the city and its inhabitants itself. The module will discuss the enormous cultural dynamism of the city (especially the visual arts from the Bellini to Tintoretto and Veronese), changing urban fabric, the role of ritual and ceremony, the position of the Church, and class and gender. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    De-Industrialisation: A Social and Cultural History, 1970–1990 
   
   
    This module examines the social and cultural impact of economic change in three traditional industrial regions in the UK, Germany and the US in the 1970s and 1980s. It takes thematic approaches, exploring topics including: overlaps and differences between Contemporary History and the Social Sciences; change and decline in traditional industries such as coal, steel and shipbuilding; political responses to industrial change, with a particular focus on industrial conflict over closures, among others. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Soviet State and Society 
   
   
    This module examines political, social and economic transformations in the Soviet Union from the October Revolution of 1917 to Gorbachev’s attempted reforms and the collapse of the state in 1991. You will look at Russia both from the top down (state-building strategies; leadership and regime change; economic and social policy formulation and implementation) and from the bottom up (societal developments and the changing structures and practices of everyday life). You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Rise of Modern China 
   
   
    In this module you will study the history of China from the 1840s, through to the establishment of the People’s Republic in 1949. You will focus in particular on the ways in which Chinese society responded to the arrival of ‘modernity’ in the form of the Western powers and Japan throughout the period in question, but also how different groups in China tried to remould or redefine China as a ‘modern’ nation-state and society. In this module you will have a two-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Management Strategy 
   
   
    In this module you will be given a theoretical and applied overview of strategic management in today's operational environment. It introduces and analyses the key concepts, frameworks and techniques of strategic management, which allow them to diagnose complex situations related to real-world business development. For this module you will have a one 1-hour and a half lecture and a one 1-hour and a half seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Chinese Business Law 
   
   
    This module aims to provide an overview of the development of Chinese business law in the context of economic globalisation and in particular of China's WTO membership. The module mainly include: Political Economy of Business Regulation in China and China's WTO Membership; Introduction to the Chinese's Legal System and Law Making Process; Chinese Contract Law, Law on Business Organisations, Company Law and Corporate Governance in China, Chinese Antimonopoly Law and Intellectual Property Laws. It concludes with discussions on the possible impacts of China's integration into the economic globalisation on its domestic business regulation. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Social Change and Public Policy in China's Reform Era 
   
   
    In this module  you will learn how the Chinese central government has responded to socio-economic changes by issuing a number of key policy initiatives, most notably in the field of social security, health, education, labour, innovation and the environment. In the first part of the module participants will be sensitised about the interplay between socio-economic transformation, administrative reform and public policy making during China's reform era (1978).  
   
  
      
   
  
    Environment and Development in China 
   
   
    The module provides an introduction to environmental challenges faced by China, with special reference to the reform era since 1978. A variety of environmental issues, including air, land and water management will be dealt with in connection with analyses of economic policies, institutional changes, politics and social and cultural changes. The lectures will address a number of environment and development issues in contemporary China, including the implications of industrialisation and urbanisation on the environment, the tensions between economic development and environmental protection, the characteristics of government decision-making and public participation in environmental governance, the evolution of the environmental legal system and the rise of environmental activism in China in recent years. You will also study such topics as the impact of foreign direct investment (FDI) on China's environment, China's position on climate change and international environmental cooperation. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week and one 1-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
      
   You will also attend a non-assessed weekly lecture module throughout the year called ‘Doing History’. This builds on the first-year core module Learning History and aims to develop your awareness of the craft of the historian, developing essential skills to get the most out of your second-year options and enabling you to determine what sort of historian you are. It also operates as a bridge to your third and final year, permitting you to make informed decisions about your choice of Special Subject, third-year options, and dissertation.  
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Dissertation 
   
   
    This module involves the in-depth study of a historical subject from which you will create a 10,000 word dissertation. You will have regular meetings with your supervisor and a weekly one hour lecture to guide you through this task. Usually this will be linked to a special subject in History.  
   
  
      
   
     Optional  
  
    Kings, Saints and Monsters in England, 450–850 
   
   
    This module examines cultural and political changes in the southern half of the island of Britain between the fifth and ninth centuries, in particular the development of kingship and kingdoms as a form of political organisation, and the effects of the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity. You will spend three hours in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Italy at War, 1935–45 
   
   
    Spending three hours per week in seminars and tutorials, you will be given a framework to understand the experience of Italians (and to a lesser degree their enemies, allies, and collaborators) during the military conflicts in the long decade 1935–45, as well as knowledge of the background factors that shaped these experiences. As source material you will have the chance to explore diplomatic correspondence, personal memoirs, newspapers and magazines, newsreels, as well as examining the representation of the war in literature and cinema.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Samurai Revolution: Reinventing Japan, 1853–1878 
   
   
    This module surveys the dramatic cultural encounter in the 19th century as the world of the samurai was confronted by Western expansion and the Age of Steam. It explores the forces at work in Japan’s rapid transformation from an ‘ancien r&eacute;gime’ under the rule of the Shogun into a ‘modern’ imperial power. Original documents examined in class draw on the growing range of Japanese primary sources available in English translation, together with the extensive works of Victorian diplomats, newspaper correspondents and other foreign residents in the treaty ports. You will have a three-hour seminar each week to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Racial State to Reconstruction: women and gender relations in Germany, 1939–45 
   
   
    This module adopts a perspective of women's and gender history to explore the history of Germany in the period from the beginning of the National Socialist dictatorship up to the division of Germany into two post-war states in 1949. It will examine National Socialist discourses, policies and practices in relation to women and gender relations by drawing on records of public authorities and institutions concerned with educating and training the female population in line with Nazi precepts, mobilising labour for the Nazi war economy, sustaining home front morale, and combating ‘threats to the race’. You will have a weekly three hour seminar to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    China from Revolution to Socialism 
   
   
    This module focuses on China from the Communist Revolution in the 1920s through the pre-reform era (1921–1978), examining how China was organised and governed, changes in rural and urban society, the family, the economy and the Chinese workplace under the socialist period (1949–1978). You will learn about topics such as the origins of communism in China and the CCP's rise to power, the transformation of rural and urban society post-1949 and the Great Leap Forward and subsequent famine. You will analyse in-depth all phases of the Cultural Revolution including return to power of the pragmatists and the beginning of reform as well as changing views of Mao as a leader. In this module you will have one 1-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    China Through Film and Literature 
   
   
    In this module you will first examine the close linkage between literature and cinema in China and the consequences and then explore trends in modern Chinese literature and cinema, with a primary focus on different genres and themes developed since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949. By placing Chinese literature and film within their cultural, social and historical contexts, you will analyse, interpret and appreciate such phenomena. You will analyse individual texts in translation and films with English subtitles to increase your awareness of the major developments in literature and film as they are embedded in the wider changes in contemporary China. You will have one 3-hour practical class each week studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Media and Communications in Globalising China 
   
   
    Media systems are critically important in any modern political system, and this module leads you directly to the heart of understanding how the media relates to contemporary society and politics in the People’s Republic of China. It introduces you to the unprecedented transformation in contemporary Chinese media and communication in the context of economic reforms, development of new media technologies and globalisation through a two hour weekly lecture.  
   
  
      
   
  
    China's Political Economy 
   
   
    This module examines the interaction between politics and economy in China during the economic reform period from 1978 onward. Particular attention will be given to the progress and periods of China’s reform, the political context of major economic policies, reform of major aspects of the economy, evolution of economic institutions, as well as an overview of economic development in China prior to 1978. The module will highlight the role of the political factors and state policies in China’s economy, which is important for a good understanding of the reform and economic development in China. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Popular Culture in China 
   
   
    This module examines the rise of ‘popular culture’ in China and the wider Chinese-speaking world from the end of the 19th century through to the present era. You’ll debate about what ‘counts’ as popular culture in a Chinese context, the module traces the development of specifically ‘modern’ forms of popular culture, ranging from music and film to the ‘mass culture’ of Maoist China and television in more recent decades. The module also focuses on significant sites and periods in the development of modern popular culture, including 1930s Shanghai, postwar Hong Kong, Taiwan in the 1970s and 1980s, and the Reform-era PRC. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.