Modules  
  This course starts in September and is available to study over 3 years full-time.  
  Each year of full-time study is made up of 120 credits.   
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   
    
    Counselling and Personal Growth
     
    
   
   
   
     This module will introduce you to basic counselling skills and Person-Centred Counselling as well as the rationale for interventions in a counselling interview. You’ll discover the importance of monitoring self-awareness. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the Culture of Counselling 
   
   
   
     The module will focus on the culture of the client and the counsellor examining how cultural and individual similarities/differences have an impact on the counselling relationship. Topics to be explored include: enculturation and equality opportunity, working with diversity and difference, advanced counselling skills, and fundamentals of Person-Centred Theory. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Awareness and Communication 1 
   
   
   
     This module entails intensive work on self-awareness and communication skills. You’ll evaluate the development of your own self-awareness and communications skills within the framework of counselling professional development. This will be achieved through a comparative study of one other counselling approach, skills practice and group work tasks and discussions. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Awareness and Communication 2 
   
   
   
     You’ll evaluate the development of your own self-awareness and communications skills within the framework of counselling and professional development. Emphasis will be placed on the need for continuous intrapersonal development and awareness of personal culture conditioning for counsellor competence.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Coping with Change 
   
   
   
     This module will focus on the process of identity development as it relates to counselling theory and practice. Theory associated with life stages, transitions, identity development models, and the impact of loss and bereavement will be examined in relation to appropriate counselling practice. Study in this module will involve an exploration of how the major schools of counselling and psychotherapy theorise on loss and grief. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Issues of Power and Oppression 
   
   
   
     This module will examine power within relationships and the impact of suppression and oppression on the individual.  You’ll explore your personal experiences of power and oppression.  Issues of race, culture, gender, poverty, disability, age, sexuality, class and education will be explored in terms of the counsellor’s own cultural conditioning.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Challenge of Individual Growth 
   
   
   
     This module will focus on the cross-cultural dimensions of verbal and non-verbal communication in counselling relationships.  There will be an exploration of the sources and development of blocks and defences in self, counsellor and client and how these affect communication.  Experience in this module will help to develop the skills of advanced empathy, immediacy, self-disclosure, and challenging.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   
    
    Person Centred Theory and Practice
     
    
   
   
   
     This module will focus on a review and critical analysis of the Person-centred approach to counselling and therapy.  Topics to be covered include: Rogers’ theory of therapy and therapeutic growth in individual work and in groups; Rogers’ six conditions for therapeutic change, seven stages of process and self-concept theory; current Person-centred counselling practice issues and potential for the Person-centred approach to be used in a variety of working environments. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Human Development Theory and Psychopathology 
   
   
   
     In this module, Rogers’ work on personality theory and theory of development (19 propositions) will be studied in depth. Some topics to be covered include: theorists such as Winnicott, Bowlby, Adler, Miller and Stern. The module will explore child and adult development theories; human development theory and its impact on the work of a counselling practitioner, as well as the Person-Centred approach and psychopathology.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Ethical foundation and Professional Practice 
   
   
   
     This module will examine the elements of good professional practice by focusing on professional practice issues and case study material.   
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Personal Therapy and Personal Development 
   
   
   
     This module will examine the elements of good professional practice as experienced by you through attendance of 20 hours of personal therapy. There will be an exploration of the personal development experienced throughout the counselling process. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Supervised Counselling Practice and Case Study 
   
   
   
     During this module you will study in depth elements of case study preparation and case analysis methods for professional use in counselling and psychotherapy. You’ll produce your own case study, drawing from placement experience as well as review published case study material and the work of those engaged in counselling research. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Final Year modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Comparative Humanistic Counselling 
   
   
   
     This module will examine the theoretical foundations of Humanistic Counselling. Topics to be covered include: gestalt counselling, existential counselling, transactional analysis, transpersonal therapy and person-centred counselling in context. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Integration of Personal development 
   
   
   
     This module will examine the elements of good professional practice as experienced by you through attendance of 20 hours of personal therapy. There will be an exploration of the personal development experienced throughout the counselling process and in the learning group. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    
    Consolidation of Professional Development
     
    
   
   
   
     During this module you will study in depth elements of case study preparation and case analysis methods for professional use in counselling and psychotherapy. You will produce your own case study, drawing from your placement experience as well as reviewing published case study material and the work of those engaged in counselling research. A major focus will be studying the supervisory relationship and its importance as a source of support, education and challenge for the counselling practitioner. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Therapeutic Writing in Counselling 
   
   
   
     This module will focus on the therapeutic potential of writing for personal learning and professional practice as counsellors. This includes exploring the use of: diaries, creative journals, dialogues, letters and autobiography in creative writing for personal learning. The module will also consider the potential of writing for professional development.  In particular the role of narrative in therapy will be examined with specific emphasis on facilitating therapeutic work.    
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Spirituality and Counselling  
   
   
   
     This module will explore the nature of the spiritual experience and its place in the counselling process.  A core notion of the module is that the counselling relationship and process can, at their most effective, offer transcendent and transformative experiences.  The module will also explore comparisons with psychoanalytic approaches to the spiritual, and the therapeutic model offered by the psychosynthesis approach.  The nature of the spiritual will be explored in the context of the major world religions. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    
    Approaches to Supervision
     
    
   
   
   
     This Module is designed to enable counsellors to extend their understanding of the counselling supervisory process, and so to make the most effective use of their counselling supervision, and to deepen their process of internal supervision.  The Module will take as its core model the Person Centred Approach to Supervision.  It will offer an opportunity to critically evaluate this approach, and to contextualise it by examining a range of other approaches to supervision.   
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Body in Counselling  
   
   
   
     The module aims to introduce you to the theoretical and practical aspects of Biosynthesis Bodywork by using an experiential approach. You’ll explore and extend your existing counseling skills to incorporate a new awareness into your work.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Solution Focused Brief Therapy 
   
   
   
     This module will examine the broad context of brief or time limited therapy. In particular a solution focused collaborative approach to working with clients will be explored. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Culture- centred Counselling 
   
   
   
     This module will foreground the role of culture as a key intrapersonal, interpersonal and political variable in achieving an effective working alliance between counsellor and client. The module will examine the impact of cultural identity and of similarities and differences between counsellor and client on the therapeutic relationship. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Expressive Arts in professional Practice 
   
   
   
     Brings a range of creative material, media and exercises to encourage you to explore and deepen your own creative self-expression. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Current Findings in Neuroscience 
   
   
   
     This module will examine the contribution of neuroscience to the field of counselling and psychotherapy. You’ll explore the contribution of neuroscience to theories of human development and the impact this has on counselling and psychotherapy with particular reference to the Person-Centred Approach.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    
    Working with Stress 
     
    
   
   
   
     You’ll explore the various definitions of stress and examine personal and creative ways of working with stress. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Working with Addictions 
   
   
   
     You’ll define addiction and explore the various theoretical perspectives, through creative ways of working with addictions in counselling and helping roles. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Working with Grief and Loss 
   
   
   
     Examining models of grief and loss, you’ll study theoretical underpinnings of counselling interventions and the impact of cultural identity and of similarities and differences between counsellor and client on perception of grief and loss. The ‘self’ of the counsellor will provide the focus for examining and developing specific competences and skills. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Journal Therapy 
   
   
   
     This module will examine different ways of using Journal Therapy interventions with clients and as part of supervision. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Working with Trauma 
   
   
   
     You’ll explore the various definitions of trauma and PTSD as well as the theoretical perspectives and creative ways of working with trauma and traumatic stress in counselling and helping roles. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Sex and Sexuality 
   
   
   
     You’ll gain understanding how sex and sexuality issues can be brought into the counselling environment. Theoretical perspectives on sexual identities and working with sexual problems will be examined.