Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Computers in Business
    
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the use of computers and IT in business today - and in particular spreadsheet modelling - via a lab based assessment, case study group report and presentation. You’ll have 17 one-hour lectures; 4 one-hour computer lab sessions; 1 one-hour presentation tutorial and one 15 minute project review meeting. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Macroeconomics for Business
    
   
   
    This module allows you to explore the nature and scope of the macroeconomic policy agenda, and develops the analytical frameworks necessary for the evaluation of policy instruments. The module enables you to understand the economic arguments that under-lie different views and to evaluate relevant arguments.  You’ll have 9 two-hour lectures, 1 one-hour lecture, and 3 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Microeconomics for Business B1
    
   
   
    This module aims to develop your understanding of important economic concepts, including: exchange and trade, consumer theory, factor markets and welfare economics. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 3 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Methods 1b
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll study key mathematical and statistical techniques and their application to problems and data including: economic application of calculus; confidence intervals; introduction to hypothesis testing; partial differentiation, optimisation of two variables, probability, random variables and sampling distributions. Over the course of this module you’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 8 workshops.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Organisational Behaviour 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the basic ideas of organisational behaviour. The content will encourage you to develop an understanding of managing and developing people within business organisations. The module will draw its primary material from the major theorists and theories of both organisational psychology and organisational behaviour. The module will also develop links with other aspects of the business school curriculum such as general management and international business.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Microeconomics for Business A
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to the microeconomic theory of the market and the firm. Topics covered include: market demand, supply and equilibrium, firm production and costs, market structure, perfect competition, monopolistic competition, oligopoly and monopoly. For this module you will have 10 two-hour lectures and 3 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Corporate Strategy
    
   
   
       
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Entrepreneurship and Business
    
   
   
    This module presents a formal analysis of entrepreneurship in theory and practice leading on to a consideration of creativity and business concept generation.  You’ll have 11 two-hour lectures with the module concluding with the practical application of these theories and concepts in a business planning and business concept presentation.
      
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
   
   East Asian Business in the Twentieth Century 
   
   
    In view of the recent impact East Asian business systems have had on world business and trading patterns, it is essential to understand how they evolved. This module is aimed at providing the historical background of Japan, the rise of the 'Tiger Economies' and China's vibrant development. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and one two-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Accounting
    
   
   
   In this module you’ll be introduced to the nature and purpose of Financial Accounting and study key accounting concepts including: the impact of accounting policy selection, accounting standards and the recording and collating of accounting information. Accounting reports e.g. income statements, balance sheets and cash flow statements will be developed from accounting data and you’ll gain an understanding of some contemporary accounting issues. You’ll have 20 one-hour lectures and 3 one-hour seminars.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    New Venture Creation
    
   
  
    New Venture Creation will engage you in the more practical elements of innovation and enterprise activity, in terms of creating new businesses and entrepreneurship within the corporate environment. You’ll become prepared for enterprise activity across a variety of contexts.  You’ll have 11 two-hour seminars, 7 hours lecture-based learning and 4 hours of mentored group work/practical enterprise activity.
     
   
  
      
   
  
    Business Law A
    
   
   
    In this module you will study topics such as: UK legal framework, impact of EU legislation, law of contract (essential elements, performance and remedies), business and the Law of Tort, employment law and law in a local and global context. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 4 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Management Accounting
    
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the use of accounting information for managerial planning, decision-making and control within an organisation. Over the course of the module you will have 11 one-hour lectures, 6 one-hour workshops and 5 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Insurance in a Risky World
    
   
   
    This module examines how insurance markets operate to satisfy commercial and individual customers' demand for protection against risk, and would usually include some of the following topics: introduction to insurance, private and social insurance, the historical development of insurance, why buy property/liability insurance?, why buy life, health and pensions insurance?, how is insurance distributed to consumers?,  international aspects of insurance and insurance and catastrophes. You’ll study this over 10 two-hour lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Quantitative Methods 2A
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll study further maths and statistics including topics such as linear algebra, constrained optimisation, difference equations and hypothesis testing. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 8 one-hour workshops.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Pricing and Decision Making
    
   
   
    This module presents an introduction to economic decision making with a focus on the firm's pricing decisions and mechanisms, including: monopoly pricing; oligopoly pricing (non-co-operative and collusive); auctions and pricing under uncertainty. Over the course of the module you’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Innovation
    
   
   
    In this module, you will cover topics including: innovation in the history of economic thought, basic concepts in the economics of innovation, Intellectual property, economics of networks, standards and dominant designs, the entrepreneur, innovation, demand and consumption,  clusters, innovation and the division of labour, innovation, competitiveness and trade, policy for innovation. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 sixty-minute tutorials. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Econometrics
    
   
   
    This module will provide an introduction to the theory and practice of quantitative economic modelling at a basic level. The theoretical framework will be developed around the classical regression model and its extensions, with theoretical understanding being supplemented with computer-based practical examples of modelling and data analysis. You’ll have 2 one-hour lectures for nine weeks or examples classes per week and 5 one-hour formative computer lab tests.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    International Firms
    
   
   
    In this you’ll module examine the international business environment, in particular, the impact of international firms on the economy, the determinants of Foreign Direct Investment and their significance on regional and global economic integration. There is an emphasis on cultural and organisational aspects of international business and their impact on Corporate Social Responsibility, as well as differences in corporate governance across economic areas. The course structure is based on 3 sections focusing mainly on the activities of MNEs, firm organisation and performance, and the impact of international firms on the economy. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Organisation
    
   
   
    In this module, you’ll study topics such as: organisational architecture, decision rights, reward systems, Individual performance evaluation, tournament theory, shareholder activism, CEO performance and turnover. You’ll study this through 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Topics in Labour and Personnel Economics 
   
   
    This module will foster your understanding of the process by which business organisations make effective use of labour, and the policies they employ to this effect. Topics covered include: employees’ incentives in organisations, the hiring process, training and labour turnover, employee pay and performance, trade unions and employment relations.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing Strategy
    
   
   
    This module focuses on the strategic dimension of marketing with reference to the ways in which organisations compete with different product-market offers. There is an emphasis on the processes involved in the development of a marketing strategy and the ways in which such strategies evolve. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Tourism futures: the challenge of sustainability
    
   
   
    You’ll survey the international tourism industry in the 21st Century, starting with lectures on the history and sociology of tourism and its broader cultural significance, you’ll analyse trends in tour operation management, sustainable transport practice, niche markets like eco-tourism, and investigate and evaluate the various social, cultural and environmental impacts which the tourist industry has on destinations. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Management Strategy
    
   
   
    This module will introduce and analyse the key concepts, theories and frameworks integral to the strategic management of organisations and to apply them to real-world situations. It will provide you with a theoretical and applied overview of strategic management in today's operational environment.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Management
    
   
   
   The module will introduce you to corporate investment and financing decision as well as study the interaction between them. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars to cover material in this module. 
    
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Accounting Information Systems
    
   
   
    This module looks at the use of accounting information systems in financial and management accounting and their control and audit. You’ll cover topics such as: introduction to systems, business processes, budgeting and decision support systems, internal control and audit, computer crime and external audit and enterprise resource planning systems. You’ll have 11 one-hour lectures and 4 two-hour lab sessions. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Database Design and Implementation
    
   
   
    This module examines the process of relational database design and implementation using relevant theory. Applications of modern databases will be studied and all students will be required to create a database system, fully documented, to solve a given problem. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour hands-on teaching on database skills.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Corporate Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management
    
   
   
    This module develops an understanding of corporate entrepreneurship (CE) and an appreciation of how larger firms can be designed to be more entrepreneurial, flexible and innovative. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Industrial Economics B: Games and Strategies
    
   
   
    This module will analyse conduct and strategies of firms from a game theoretic point of view. Topics to be covered include: basic game theory, models of oligopoly, pricing tactics and strategic entry deterrence. You will have 1 two-hour lecture per week for eight weeks and 4 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Public Choice and Economic Policy-Making
    
   
   
    This module examines the processes and influences involved in the making of UK economic policy, from a public choice perspective. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and 3 one-hour seminars to cover material in this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Regulation
    
   
  
    In this module you’ll cover two broad areas of regulation and competition policy. Topics studied include: natural monopoly regulation, retail price control, access pricing, universal service obligations, public policy on inter-firm agreements and restrictive practices, abuse of monopoly power and merger control. You will have 11 one-hour lectures plus 2 two-hour seminars to cover this module. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Industrial Economics A: Structure, Conduct and Performance
    
   
   
    This module presents an introduction to industrial economic analysis, focusing on the relationships between market concentration, conduct and performance. You will cover the measurement and determinants of market concentration, links between structure and industrial/firm performance, advertising and R&D in the context of industrial economics. You’ll have 11 one-hour lectures and 2 two-hour tutorials. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Economics
    
   
   
    This module presents an introduction to Financial Economics focusing on topics such as: the determination of interest rates; the role of financial institutions in the financial and monetary system; banking regulation and risk management in banks. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lecture and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Corporate Restructuring and Governance
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the analysis of different forms of corporate restructuring, focusing on the internal and external factors influencing restructuring as well as the effects of restructuring on a variety of firm level outcomes. You’ll have a 11 one-hour lectures and 2 two-hour tutorials. 
      
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Law and Economics
    
   
   
    This module provides an insight into the law and legal processes which have arisen from the application of economic analysis, as well as exploring the applications from the law of tort, contract and commercial law. Teaching will take place through 11 one-hour lectures and 2 two-hour tutorials for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Human Resource Management I
    
   
   
    This module introduces the basic concepts of Human Resource Management (HRM) in broader perspective and subjects them to critical analysis. Areas covered will include: HRM models, recruitment and selection, appraisal and pay, training, job design, work-life balance and HRM and performance. You’ll study through 11 ninety-minute lectures plus 2 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Business Ethics
    
   
   
    This module explores business-society relations through the theories and practices of business ethics and social responsibility (BE&SR). The first part of the module will address the concept of business ethics, a discussion of citizenship theory and the challenges of globalisation and sustainability. The second part of the module will address the issues, impacts of business on individual stakeholder groups and analyse BE and SR in relation to each group. You’ll have 11 one-hour lectures and 4 one-hour seminars to cover material for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing and Society
    
   
   
    In this module, you’ll be given an overview of marketing and society, marketing and public policy issues in advertising and promotion, marketing and public policy issues in pricing, marketing and public policy issues in distribution, marketing and consumer protection policy, consumer response to product information and disclosure. Teaching for this module will take place through 11 one-hour lectures and 2 two-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Markets
    
   
   
    This module examines the workings of the major financial markets and looks at the way in which the prices of financial instruments are calculated. You’ll cover the key theoretical models of modern finance, capital asset pricing model, arbitrage pricing model and financial risk management with derivative instruments. Markets for equity and debt are dealt with, as are markets for derivative instruments. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Risk Management Processes
    
   
   
    This module will discuss the processes utilised by corporate enterprises to manage the risk of fortuitous loss. Once corporate risks have been identified and their impact on the firm measured, risk management attempts to control the size and frequency of loss, and to finance those fortuitous losses which do occur. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Consumer Behaviour
    
   
   
    This module introduces and develops frameworks which enable businesses to understand the buying behaviour of consumers. You will have 11 one-hour lecture and 3 one-hour seminars to study for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Auditing, Governance and Scandals
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll develop an understanding of alternative perspectives on the role of external audit, audit theory and practice and the role of judgement in audit. The module also includes a critical review of corporate scandals and the associated failures in corporate governance systems/procedures. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 3 one-hour seminars to cover material in this module.