Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Computers in Business
    
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the use of computers and IT in business today - and in particular spreadsheet modelling - via a lab based assessment, case study group report and presentation. You’ll have 17 one-hour lectures; 4 one-hour computer lab sessions; 1 one-hour presentation tutorial and one 15 minute project review meeting. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Macroeconomics for Business
    
   
   
    This module allows you to explore the nature and scope of the macroeconomic policy agenda, and develops the analytical frameworks necessary for the evaluation of policy instruments. The module enables you to understand the economic arguments that under-lie different views and to evaluate relevant arguments. You’ll have 9 two-hour lectures, 1 one-hour lecture, and 3 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Microeconomics for Business B1
    
   
   
    This module aims to develop your understanding of important economic concepts, including: exchange and trade, consumer theory, factor markets and welfare economics. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 3 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Methods 1b
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll study key mathematical and statistical techniques and their application to problems and data including: economic application of calculus; confidence intervals; introduction to hypothesis testing; partial differentiation, optimisation of two variables, probability, random variables and sampling distributions. Over the course of this module you’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 8 workshops.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Organisational Behaviour 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the basic ideas of organisational behaviour. The content will encourage you to develop an understanding of managing and developing people within business organisations. The module will draw its primary material from the major theorists and theories of both organisational psychology and organisational behaviour. The module will also develop links with other aspects of the business school curriculum such as general management and international business.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Microeconomics for Business A
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to the microeconomic theory of the market and the firm. Topics covered include: market demand, supply and equilibrium, firm production and costs, market structure, perfect competition, monopolistic competition, oligopoly and monopoly. For this module you will have 10 two-hour lectures and 3 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Corporate Strategy
    
   
   
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Entrepreneurship and Business
    
   
   
    This module presents a formal analysis of entrepreneurship in theory and practice leading on to a consideration of creativity and business concept generation.  You’ll have 11 two-hour lectures with the module concluding with the practical application of these theories and concepts in a business planning and business concept presentation.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Insurance in a Risky World 
   
   
    This module provides you with an introduction to the demand for and supply of insurance. The module examines how insurance markets operate to satisfy commercial and individual customers' demand for protection against risk, and would usually include topics such as private and social insurance, the historical development of insurance, the supply of insurance, Lloyd's and the London Insurance Market, how insurance is distributed to consumers, the role of insurance in the economy, international aspects of insurance and insurance and catastrophes.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    East Asian Business in the Twentieth Century 
   
   
    In view of the recent impact East Asian business systems have had on world business and trading patterns, it is essential to understand how they evolved. This module is aimed at providing the historical background of Japan, the rise of the 'Tiger Economies' and China's vibrant development. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 1 two-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Accounting
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the nature and purpose of Financial Accounting and study key accounting concepts including: the impact of accounting policy selection, accounting standards and the recording and collating of accounting information. Accounting reports e.g. income statements, balance sheets and cash flow statements will be developed from accounting data and you’ll gain an understanding of some contemporary accounting issues. You’ll have 20 one-hour lectures and 3 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    New Venture Creation
    
   
   
    New Venture Creation will engage you in the more practical elements of innovation and enterprise activity, in terms of creating new businesses and entrepreneurship within the corporate environment. You’ll become prepared for enterprise activity across a variety of contexts.  You’ll have 11 two-hour seminars, 7 hours lecture-based learning and 4 hours of mentored group work/practical enterprise activity.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Business Law A
    
   
   
    In this module you will study topics such as: UK legal framework, impact of EU legislation, law of contract (essential elements, performance and remedies), business and the Law of Tort, employment law and law in a local and global context. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 4 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    East Asian Business in the Global Economy
    
   
   
    This module looks at the recent growth, development and internationalisation of businesses from the major economies of East Asia. It focuses in particular on China, a country whose businesses are currently internationalising rapidly, as well as other major East Asian economies, including Japan and South Korea. You’ll identify characteristic features of East Asian business systems within which to contextualise their development and growing interactions with the global economy (including internationalisation strategies and trajectories).  You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 2 one-hour seminars. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Management Accounting
    
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the use of accounting information for managerial planning, decision-making and control within an organisation. Over the course of the module you will have 11 one-hour lectures, 6 one-hour workshops and 5 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Work and Society
    
   
   
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Finance 
   
  
      
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Two Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Introductory Econometrics
    
   
   
    This module will provide an introduction to the theory and practice of quantitative economic modelling at a basic level. The theoretical framework will be developed around the classical regression model and its extensions, with theoretical understanding being supplemented with computer-based practical examples of modelling and data analysis. You’ll have 2 one-hour lectures for nine weeks or examples classes per week and 5 one-hour formative computer lab tests.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    International Firms
    
   
   
    In this you’ll module examine the international business environment, in particular, the impact of international firms on the economy, the determinants of Foreign Direct Investment and their significance on regional and global economic integration. There is an emphasis on cultural and organisational aspects of international business and their impact on Corporate Social Responsibility, as well as differences in corporate governance across economic areas. The course structure is based on 3 sections focusing mainly on the activities of MNEs, firm organisation and performance, and the impact of international firms on the economy. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Methods 2A
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll study further maths and statistics including topics such as linear algebra, constrained optimisation, difference equations and hypothesis testing. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 8 one-hour workshops.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Pricing and Decision Making
    
   
   
    This module presents an introduction to economic decision making with a focus on the firm's pricing decisions and mechanisms, including: monopoly pricing; oligopoly pricing (non-co-operative and collusive); auctions and pricing under uncertainty. Over the course of the module you’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Innovation
    
   
   
    In this module, you will cover topics including: innovation in the history of economic thought, basic concepts in the economics of innovation, Intellectual property, economics of networks, standards and dominant designs, the entrepreneur, innovation, demand and consumption,  clusters, innovation and the division of labour, innovation, competitiveness and trade, policy for innovation. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 sixty-minute tutorials.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Organisation
    
   
   
    In this module, you’ll study topics such as: organisational architecture, decision rights, reward systems, Individual performance evaluation, tournament theory, shareholder activism, CEO performance and turnover. You’ll study this through 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Risk Management Decisions 
   
   
    This module will allow you to understand the negative impact of risk on the stakeholders (including individuals, employees, corporate decision takers, and shareholders) of a modern organisation and to understand the risk-creation process in an organisation. You will analyse the nature of value-creating risk management decisions and the module will introduce you to the different aspects of corporate risk and examine how the risk of fortuitous loss may affect the various stakeholders in the operations of firms.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    East Asian Business in the Global Economy 
   
   
    This module looks at the recent growth, development and internationalisation of businesses from the major economies of East Asia. It focuses in particular on China, a country whose businesses are currently internationalising rapidly, as well as other major East Asian economies, including Japan and South Korea. You’ll identify characteristic features of East Asian business systems within which to contextualise their development and growing interactions with the global economy (including internationalisation strategies and trajectories). You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Topics in Labour and Personnel Economics 
   
   
    This module will foster your understanding of the process by which business organisations make effective use of labour, and the policies they employ to this effect. Topics covered include: employees’ incentives in organisations, the hiring process, training and labour turnover, employee pay and performance, trade unions and employment relations  
   
  
      
   
  
    Managing Tourism and the Environment: Conflict or Consensus?
    
   
   
    The module will examine and explore: the interactions between and the management of tourism and the environment, the emergence of environmentally-concerned consumers and the implications of different environmental paradigms for tourism development, debates surrounding the environmental and economic impacts of tourism and the role played by pressure groups in influencing tourism development. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 sixty-minute seminars.   
   
  
      
   
  
    East Asian Business in the Twentieth Century
    
   
   
    In view of the recent impact East Asian business systems have had on world business and trading patterns, it is essential to understand how they evolved. This module is aimed at providing the historical background of Japan, the rise of the 'Tiger Economies' and China's vibrant development. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and 1 two-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Management
    
   
   
    The module will introduce you to corporate investment and financing decision as well as study the interaction between them. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars to cover material in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Management Accounting and Decisions II
    
   
   
    This module introduces the following topics: activity based costing, process costing, transfer pricing and the changing role of the management accountant. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 sixty-minute seminars. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Corporate Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management
    
   
  
    This module develops an understanding of corporate entrepreneurship (CE) and an appreciation of how larger firms can be designed to be more entrepreneurial, flexible and innovative. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Psychology of Economic and Business Decisions
    
   
  
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Computational Finance
    
   
   
    This module will provide you with the skills and ideas necessary to implement basic computational approaches to financial problems. The module stresses the fundamentals of finance; provides you with a knowledge and understanding of the key finance subjects such as money market, return metric, portfolio models and asset pricing models. It equips you with the essential techniques applied in financial calculations.   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Industrial Economics B: Games and Strategies
    
   
   
    This module will analyse conduct and strategies of firms from a game theoretic point of view. Topics to be covered include: basic game theory, models of oligopoly, pricing tactics and strategic entry deterrence. You will have 1 two-hour lecture per week for 8 weeks and 4 one-hour tutorials.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Public Choice and Economic Policy-Making
    
   
   
    This module examines the processes and influences involved in the making of UK economic policy, from a public choice perspective. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and 3 one-hour seminars to cover material in this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Regulation
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll cover two broad areas of regulation and competition policy. Topics studied include: natural monopoly regulation, retail price control, access pricing, universal service obligations, public policy on inter-firm agreements and restrictive practices, abuse of monopoly power and merger control. You will have 11 one-hour lectures plus 2 two-hour seminars to cover this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Industrial Economics A: Structure, Conduct and Performance
    
   
   
    This module presents an introduction to industrial economic analysis, focusing on the relationships between market concentration, conduct and performance. You will cover the measurement and determinants of market concentration, links between structure and industrial/firm performance, advertising and R&D in the context of industrial economics. You’ll have 11 one-hour lectures and 2 two-hour tutorials. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Economics
    
   
   
    This module presents an introduction to Financial Economics focusing on topics such as: the determination of interest rates; the role of financial institutions in the financial and monetary system; banking regulation and risk management in banks. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lecture and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Corporate Restructuring and Governance
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the analysis of different forms of corporate restructuring, focusing on the internal and external factors influencing restructuring as well as the effects of restructuring on a variety of firm level outcomes. You’ll have a 11 one-hour lectures and 2 two-hour tutorials. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Risk Management Processes
    
   
   
    This module will discuss the processes utilised by corporate enterprises to manage the risk of fortuitous loss. Once corporate risks have been identified and their impact on the firm measured, risk management attempts to control the size and frequency of loss, and to finance those fortuitous losses which do occur. You’ll have 11 ninety-minute lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Risk, Information and Insurance
    
   
   
    You’ll examine individual decision-making under conditions of risk and uncertainty, and investigate the effectiveness of insurance as a means of controlling risk. You’ll have 11 one-hour lectures and 2 two-hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Optional  
  
    Business Ethics 
   
   
    This module explores business-society relations through the theories and practices of business ethics and social responsibility (BE&SR). The first part of the module will address the concept of business ethics, a discussion of citizenship theory and the challenges of globalisation and sustainability. The second part of the module will address the issues, impacts of business on individual stakeholder groups and analyse BE and SR in relation to each group. You’ll have 11 one-hour lectures and four one-hour seminars to cover material for this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Corporate Finance 
   
   
    This module will develop your knowledge of financial decision-making and strategic financial decisions, including takeovers and mergers. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and two two-hour seminars per semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Financial Markets 
   
   
    This module examines markets for equity and debt and markets for derivative instruments. It will introduce you to the processes of portfolio building, management and performance measurement and examines the workings of the major financial markets, looking at the way in which the prices of financial instruments are calculated. The module covers the key theoretical models of modern finance, capital asset pricing model, arbitrage pricing model, financial risk management with derivative instruments.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Law and Economics 
   
   
    This module provides an insight into the law and legal processes which have arisen from the application of economic analysis, as well as exploring the applications from the law of tort, contract and commercial law. Teaching will take place through 11 one-hour lectures and 2 two-hour tutorials for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing and Society 
   
  
    This module will give you an overview of marketing and its impact on society. It will consider marketing and socially-responsible consumption, marketing and public policy issues in advertising, promotion, pricing and distribution, marketing and consumer protection policy, and consumer response to product information and disclosure.  
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Exploring Perspectives in Entrepreneurship 
   
   
    This module will take you through the definitions of entrepreneurship/entrepreneurial activity, and consider the theoretical perspectives underpinning the study of entrepreneurship, for example economic theories, sociological approaches, and psychological approaches. You will understand what shapes the practice of entrepreneurship both in different settings (eg social entrepreneurship or family business) and due to contextual influences (eg entrepreneurship in the media and the influence of gender).  
   
  
      
   
  
    Public Services Management
    
   
   
    You’ll examine the development of, and current issues in, public services management to include public management, bureaucracy, leadership, e-government and public service. You’ll have 11 one-hour lectures and 2 two-hour tutorials to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Business, Government and Public Policy
    
   
   
    In this module, you’ll be encouraged to understand the political and institutional frameworks within which business operates. Businesses do not simply react to policies set by government however; they are intimately involved in the processes of policy formation and decision making will be examined. You’ll be encouraged to think critically about policy formation and the role of business in this process. You’ll have 11 two-hour lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.