Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
   
    Studying the Greek World  
   
   
    This wide-ranging module introduces you to the history, literature and art of the Greek World from 1600BC-31BC; the period from the Bronze Age to the point when Greece becomes part of the Roman  Empire; no prior knowledge of the Greek world is required. You will also consider other major chapters of Greece’s history from the Mycenean Period and the Dark Ages, to the rise of the polis in  the Archaic period. You will also explore developments in Greek literary and artistic culture as well as consider aspects of the reception of ancient Greece in modern western culture. For this  module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week over the course of 10 weeks.   
   
  
      
   
   
    Studying the Roman World  
   
   
    This module introduces you to the history, literature and art of the Roman world from the beginnings of the city of Rome to the fall of the Roman Empire in the West. You will examine many  important aspects of Rome’s history such as the Roman Republic, the rise of the empire, the establishment of the Principate, and the fall of Rome. At the same time you will explore developments in  Roman literary and artistic culture, and consider aspects of the reception of ancient Rome in modern western culture. In addition, you will also examine the relationship of the Roman world to the  Greek world which complements the Autumn semester module ‘Studying the Greek World'. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week.   
   
  
      
   
   
    Interpreting Ancient History  
   
   
    This module takes you through some of the important historical issues from major periods of Greek and Roman history with an emphasis on the methodological questions raised from ancient source materials and modern debates on those issues. On completion of this module you will have a more detailed knowledge of these important historical issues and clearly understand the evidential basis on which ancient historians rely, as well as an appreciation of how contemporary preoccupations can influence the perspectives of modern practitioners of the discipline and generate debate between them. For this module you will have eight 1-hour seminars over the year and two 1-hour lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Interpreting Ancient Literature  
   
   
    Ancient literature from Homer to late antiquity is studied in this module by focusing on a representative theme. It is a required module for ancient historians in the belief that some familiarity with ancient literature is essential for a proper appreciation of Greek and Roman history. Themes will address issues such as the relationship between literature and society, the working of genres, modern and ancient receptions, the analysis of rhetoric and literary style. Recent themes have been ‘Performance and Persuasion’ and 'Love and War'; some issues treated may include: orality and performance, genre, gender, religion and literature, ritual and performance. For this module you will have eight 1-hour seminars over the year and two 1-hour lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Interpreting Ancient Art  
   
   
    In this module you will explore Greek and Roman art in more detail with the aim of gaining a broad overview of visual material from classical antiquity, whilst concentrating on a cross-section of the most famous and talked about objects and monuments of Greek and Roman culture. It is a required module for ancient historians in the belief that some familiarity with ancient art is essential for a proper appreciation of Greek and Roman history. You will be introduced to temple-sculpture, statues, wall-paintings, buildings and coins from the 6th Century BC Greek sculptures to the 4th Century AD arch of Constantine in Rome. Material for this module is organised by theme and media rather than in chronological order, starting with topography, sculpture and vase painting. For this module you will have two 1-hour lectures each week and five 2-hour seminars over the course of your first year.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
  Compulsory 
   
   
    Extended Source Study  
   
  
    This module is designed to develop your skills of research, analysis and written presentation as preparation for your third year dissertation. You will be expected to write a 5,000 word essay  
   chosen from a range of worksheet topics, each focusing on a single piece of ancient source material. You will be provided with a topic for investigation, starter bibliography and tips on how to  
   approach the question. The questions will suggest a range of possible approaches from evaluation of historical source material to exploration of literary effects, relationships with other material,  
   discussion of context or reception. A number of seminars and consultation sessions will be help you approach and develop your source study. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one  
   2-hour seminar over a period of 10 weeks. 
     
   
  
      
   
   
    Classics and Popular Culture  
   
   
    This team-taught module explores the reception of ancient Greek and Roman culture in modern popular media such as films, theatre, novels, museums, architecture, children's literature and comics, and sets out to reach an understanding of how these receptions influence the way Greek and Roman culture is approached, used, and questioned. Lectures may focus on any of the following: classical education from the 19th century to the present, the influences of the Classics on the production and content of modern literature, the establishing of museums, use and abuse of the Classics in political and philosophical debate, their role on the theatre stage as well as in film and other visual media (television, computer, games, comics, pop music). Lectures will be interspersed with weekly events based around a film, documentary, guest speaker or theatrical performances, and seminars to allow focussed group discussion of those events.   
   
  
      
   
   
    Studying Classical Scholarship  
   
   
    This module focuses on the history and development of the scholarship on ancient Greece and Rome and on specific theories, approaches and methods used by modern scholarship. The aim is to sharpen  your engagement with and understanding of secondary literature, as well as giving a deeper appreciation of the ways the ancient world has been appropriated, started in 'Classics and Popular  Culture'. Studying the history of scholarship in its socio-political context will show you how the questions we ask depend on the situations we live in; it will also allow you to judge the merits  and limitations of scholarly approaches and will develop your skills of research and analysis, as preparation for your 3rd-year dissertation. You’ll spend four hours in lectures and two hours in  seminars each week. As with the Extended Source Study, you will choose a work-sheet relating to an area of the ancient world which particularly interests you.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Independent Second Year Project  
   
   
    This module is your opportunity to expand your knowledge of the Classical world in an area which interests you, and to experiment with a method of communicating that knowledge which is different from the usual assessment practices of essay-writing, exam-writing and seminar -presentation. You might undertake research that leads to (for example) the construction of a database, or to the reconstruction of some ancient Greco-Roman artefact. You might acquire experience of a communication method which could be of use to you in a future career, e.g. by constructing a teaching plan, writing in a journalistic style, planning a museum exhibit. You might choose to experiment with a different medium of communication, e.g. video, website. The topic and form of the project chosen much both be approved by the module convener, and a supporting portfolio documenting your research forms part of the assessment, alongside the project itself. For this module you will have a combination of lectures, tutorials, seminars, computing sessions and workshops.  
   
  
      
   
   Optional  
   
    Sparta  
   
   
   
     Sparta dominates much of archaic and classical Greek history, and has figured prominently in the thought and imagination of other Western societies from antiquity to the present. This module will study the historical development of Sparta (in both domestic and external affairs) from the seventh to fourth centuries B.C. It will engage with the central issues that arise in historical study of Sparta: the problematic nature of our evidence; the Spartan social, political and military system; her subordinate populations; relations between Spartans and others both at home and abroad; and the forces behind Sparta's rise and fall as a great power. For this semester-long 20 credit module you will have two 1-hour lectures per week and a 2-hour seminar fortnightly; assessment is by a combination of coursework essay and exam.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Magic and Divination in the Roman World  
   
   
    This module examines the various ways in which magic featured in Roman life, law and literature. It aims to introduce students to the wide range of literary and material evidence for magic both within the city of Rome itself, and in the provinces. Students will explore the changing attitudes and definitions of magic over time in Rome, and will focus on specific themes and case-studies including cursing and healing, necromancy and the witch in Latin literature. For this semester-long 10 credit module you will have one 1-hour lectures per week and a 1-hour seminar fortnightly, with assessment through a coursework essay.  
   
  
      
   
   
    The Roman Empire in the East  
   
   
    The history and culture of the eastern Mediterranean world during the Roman Empire form the subject of this module. You will explore the events of the period, the 'mechanics' of Roman imperialism (conquest, organisation, administration), and the social, economic, religious, and cultural interaction between the Romans and eastern indigenous peoples. You will grapple with the nature and problems of a variety of sources - literary texts, epigraphic material, archaeological data, and visual evidence - and will consider the extent to which the surviving picture of the eastern empire and its neighbours was constructed by Rome or by the eastern peoples themselves. Modern theoretical approaches, such as those on cultural identity and imperialism, will be used and scrutinised. For this semester-long 20 credit module you will have two 1-hour lectures per week and a 2-hour seminar fortnightly; assessment is by a combination of coursework essay and exam.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
  Compulsory
   
   
   
    Dissertation  
   
  
    In this module you’ll be able to carry out an in-depth investigation of a chosen area, to be agreed with your supervisor in advance. The topic will usually be based on an area you have covered in  
   previous modules. You’ll use the skills that your degree has equipped you with thus far to complete the work required. There will be a mix of contact to achieve this including one-to-one tutorials with your supervisor, workshops and lectures.   
   
  
      
   
   Optional  
   
    Encounters with the Supernatural: Religion, Magic and the Greeks  
   
   
    This year-long Special Subject module involves 3 hours of seminars per week, and investigates the different ways in which ancient Greek men and women interacted with a wide variety of supernatural entities, including gods, heroes, nymphs and the dead. You’ll start by exploring the range of supernatural entities and ways in which relations with the supernatural structured daily life for ancient Greek men and women. You will then investigate key modes of interaction with the supernatural, as well as thinking about how ideas about and approaches to the supernatural varied over time and place. You’ll have three hours of seminars weekly. The module is assessed through a combination of coursework essays, formal presentation and exam.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Augustus  
   
   
    The year-long Special Subject module involves 3 hours of seminars per week, and provides an opportunity for intensive study of one of the most influential figures in Roman history. It module examines the ways in which, after his victory in the civil wars, Augustus established his rule over the Roman world on a secure and generally acceptable basis. Attention is paid to the ancient sources (studied in translation): these include not only historical and literary texts, but inscriptions, coins, art and architecture. This module covers not only political aspects of the theme but also Augustus' impact on society, religion, culture, and ideology. It is assessed through a combination of coursework essays, formal presentation and exam.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Women in the Greek World  
   
   
    This module studies the roles of women in Greek society, myth, religion and literature c.750-300 BC, paying special attention to the diversity of laws and customs across the Greek world, to the ideologies that validated women's subordination, and to gender issues in the writings of both male and female authors. For this semester-long 20-credit module you will have two 1-hour lectures every week and one fortnightly 2-hour seminar. The module is assessed by a combination of coursework essay and exam.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Imperial Biography  
   
   
    This module considers the genre of literature known as Imperial Biography: that is, biographies written about the Roman Emperors. In particular, it will focus on Suetonius' Lives of the Caesars and the anonymous text known as the Historia Augusta. The module will not only look at the limitations of the genre as a whole in relation to its structure and sources, but it will also look at major themes within the lives and key case studies of specific examples - ranging from physiognomics and appearance, to gender and sexuality, omens and portents, religion and philosophy, administration and empire-building, birth and death scenes and so on - all in relation to specific emperors such as Augustus, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Vespasian, Domitian, Hadrian, Marcus Aurelius, Commodus and Elagabalus. This semester-long 10 credit module has one 1-hour lecture per week and one 1-hour seminar every two weeks, and is assessed by an exam.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Constantine  
   
   
    The emperor Constantine (306-337) had a significant impact on the Roman Empire and on European history in the longer-term, above all through his support for Christianity, but also through his foundation of the city of Constantinople. This module aims to place his reign in its wider context - the turmoil experienced by the Roman Empire during the third century, the recovery of stability under Diocletian and the Tetrarchy, the emergence of the Christian church as a significant feature of the empire's religious landscape, and the new military challenges which the empire faced in the form of Persia and northern barbarian groups – and to assess Constantine’s policies on a range of fronts: religious, military and social. This semester-long 10 credit module involves one 1-hour lecture each week and a fortnightly 1-hour seminar, and is assessed by an exam.