Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory 
   
  
    Portuguese 1 
   
   
   
     This module aims to introduce you to the basic structures of Portuguese, to enable you by the end of the course to be able to comprehend a variety of texts on everyday life and current affairs in written Portuguese, to be able to conduct an elementary conversation on everyday matters, to be able to produce basic written texts in Portuguese covering everyday issues and to be able to comprehend basic spoken Portuguese in certain situations appropriate for learners at this stage. You will have 3 hours per week of classes in this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Lusophone Societies and Cultures 
   
   
   
     The Portuguese speaking-world is made up of people on four different continents: Europe, Africa, Asia and the Americas, and there are eight countries in which Portuguese remains the official language. The spread of the language is a representation of the reach of the Portuguese Empire at its height as well as a reflection of the legacy of Lusophone cultures. The module covers the major social and cultural practices from modern Lusophone societies, including aspects of popular culture such as football and soap operas, but also cultural and artistic currents in literature and film. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Plus either 
   
  
    Media and Society 
   
   
   
     This module will critically evaluate the central role that the media play in understanding contemporary society; guiding you through a series of key debates around the development, composition and function of different kinds of media: with a particular focus on newspapers, television, film and the internet. As well as examining issues surrounding the social context of the media, the module examines how regulation, self-regulation or consumer sovereignty can ensure the most socially useful news media, and how audiences consume and use media. The module involves 3 hours of lectures and seminars per week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Cultures of Everyday Life 
   
   
   
     You’ll examine the notion of 'everyday life' as it comes into contact with a range of 19th, 20th and 21st century cultural theories and modes of representation. You’ll appreciate the dense, complex and contradictory nature of day to day experience and examine public consecrated representations of everyday life (e.g. soaps, dramas, museums and archives) with a view to unmasking their ideological effects.  You’ll spend around 3 hours each week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Or 
   
  
    Communication and Culture 
   
   
   
     This module familiarises you with the interdisciplinary fields of communications theory and cultural studies, whilst encouraging you to discriminate between particular theoretical positions. You’ll analyse a range of communicative texts and cultural phenomena. Topics covered include advertising, PR, ideology, activism and intercultural communication. You’ll spend 3 hours in lectures & seminars each week.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Communication and Technology 
   
   
   
     Through this module you’ll examine the relationship between communication, the mass media, and technology: with a focus on the cultural impact of the internet, digital media and mobile phones. The module covers the use of these technologies in protest, their impact on news production, their everyday influence and the consequences of the ‘digital divide’. You’ll spend around 3 hours in lectures and seminars each week studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
  
    Introduction to the History of Modern Latin America 
   
   
   
     In this module you will be introduced to the main patterns of Latin American political, economic and social history between the late colonial period and the mid-to-late 20th Century which will give you a thorough grounding of the major issues, themes and forces that have shaped the societies in the region. In one part of the module you will study the history of the Spanish-speaking America and in the other half consider the history of Brazil and aspects such as the various patterns of change and development of the region and political radicalism. For this module you will have a one 1-hour lecture and a one 1-hour seminar each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Spain and Portugal in the Twentieth Century 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll study the evolution of Spanish and Portuguese history, politics and culture from 1898 to the present day. You’ll be encouraged to draw links between the Portuguese and Spanish experiences, and place both countries’ experience of the twentieth century within the broader context of European and wider global history in this period. Particular emphasis will be placed upon the development of both countries from a (perceived) position of ‘difference’ and ‘backwardness’ to relatively prosperous, economically developed and culturally diverse members of the European Union. You’ll spend 2 hours in classes each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   
  Compulsory 
   
  
    Researching Culture, Film and Media 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to issues and approaches at stake in culture, film and media research, you’ll become familiarised with a sample of qualitative and quantitative methods for investigating interdisciplinary research topics spending 2 hours per week in workshops and lectures. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Portuguese 2 
   
   
   
     In this module you will develop linguistic skills acquired from the beginners’ Portuguese module taken in year one (L&iacute;ngua Portuguesa 1). The module aims to provide you with a more rigorous understanding of grammar and enable you to express yourself in Portuguese. Your Oral and Aural skills will be encouraged through spoken and written comprehension exercises and a more extensive use of vocabulary. You will have 3 hours per week of classes in this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
  
    Discoveries, Empire and Colonies in the Lusophone World 
   
   
   
     This module brings together the histories and cultures of key regions of the world in which Portugal establishes varying degrees of colonial rule between the 16th and 20th centuries. In this module you will examine the historical background to the age of Discoveries against which Portugal emerged as a leader in maritime exploration and European Imperialism. You will also examine the historical and political events of Portuguese colonialism and imperialism in Africa and Brazil, with an emphasis on understanding the political and social significance of cultural production in developing countries. In this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars totalling 2 hours per week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Nation Building and National Identities in the Lusophone World 
   
   
   
     In this module you will be introduced to some of the major texts of the Portuguese-speaking world. You will examine the ways in which ideas of nationhood and national identity have been expressed and constructed through cultures of the Lusophone world. You will study the ways in which cultural production is embedded in the formation of nationhood and ideas about national identity and therefore culture are examined through its political and historical context. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Translating Cultures 
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to key concepts from inter-cultural communications theory. Using a range of examples and case-studies, you’ll be able to apply comparative analyses that isolate cultural effects on communication. A balance is struck between the ideal of harmonious inter-cultural communication on the one hand, and the richness of cultural diversity on the other. You’ll spend around 3 hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Transnational Media 
   
   
   
     Building on approaches to national cinema introduced in first-year film modules, you’ll look at recent understandings of post-national and trans-national media, and specifically consider the flows of people, media, technology, ideas, and finances among nations. In particular, you’ll address global media interactions emerging from tensions between cultural homogenisation and heterogenisation. During an average week you’ll have a one hour lecture, one hour seminar and a 2.5 hour workshop. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Cultural Politics 
   
   
   
     This module develops the political dimension of theoretical approaches to culture and communications. You’ll look at everyday forms and practices and highlight the ideological investments in questions of cultural value. Concentrating on race, class, gender, disability and sexuality as areas of inequality which shape, and are shaped by, cultural and communications practices, the course emphasizes the power dynamics at play in processes of cultural production, consumption and control. The programme moves from macro to micro approaches to culture beginning with broad questions around ideology, power and resistance and ending with the particulars of everyday strategies and tactics, spending around 3 hours in lectures and seminars each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Political Communication, Public Relations and Propaganda 
   
   
   
     You’ll be given understanding of the different factors underlying the development of political communication, public relations and propaganda and develop analytical and conceptual skills in writing on theoretical and substantive issues concerned with the social and political role of the mass media. You’ll spend around 3 hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
   
  
    In your third year of study you will spend the academic year abroad in Spain and/or Spanish America. You will be supported by our Year Abroad officer in preparation for this period in Year Two. You have the option to undertake study at a University, do a work placement or work as a language teaching assistant.  
   
   
    
   
  
    For more information, please visit the Department of Spanish, Portuguese and Latin American Studies 
   webpage. 
   
   
    
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules   
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Portuguese 3 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll enhance and reinforce the language skills developed in your year abroad. A number of key areas will be targeted including essay writing and oral presentations. You’ll be expected to conduct a discussion in written and spoken Portuguese at a high level of sophistication in terms of sentence structure, vocabulary and intellectual debate. You’ll have two hours of seminars, an hour of lectures and an hour of language lab classes per week throughout the academic year. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional 
   
  
    Hearing Cultures 
   
   
   
     This module encourages you to think critically about the role of sound in everyday life through a range of historical case studies from the late eighteenth century to the present day. All kinds of sounds are examined in relation to their cultural and social significance, from unwanted sounds such as noise, through to routine and unnoticed sounds such as those of radio and television, through to highly valued sounds such as music. You’ll have a weekly three hour workshop.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Contesting Culture 
   
   
   
     You’ll examine the contested nature of culture in a variety of contexts through 3 hours in lectures and seminars. Beginning with a definition that includes the arts and media, you’ll broaden out to consider cultural practices in a range of situations, addressing the key questions: who defines and controls culture and for what purposes and, conversely, what kinds of opportunities exist for cultural and creative resistance? 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Comics and Visual Narrative 
   
   
   
     You’ll explore the medium of comics both as popular culture and as visual language during 3 hours of lectures and seminars each week. Beginning with a history of graphic sequential narrative together with an introduction to literary approaches to narrative (narratology), you’ll look at issues around censorship, cultural value, aesthetics and narrative form. Authors will include: Kevin Huizenga, Art Spiegelman, Marjane Satrapi, Chris Ware, Daniel Clowes, Bryan Talbot, Harvey Pekar, Julie Doucett, Joe Sacco, Jeffrey Brown, Neil Gaiman and James Kochalka. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Brazilian Slave Society 
   
   
   
     This module aims to provide you  with an understanding of the centrality of the history of slavery in the study of Brazilian society and of the significance of Brazilian Slavery in both the transatlantic slave systems and slave societies in the Americas. In the first semester the module introduces students to the different disciplinary and intellectual approaches to the study of slavery in Brazil. This will require students to draw on comparative contexts of slavery across the Americas both thematically and theoretically. Throughout the module close attention will be paid to the problems of sources and perspectives in the study of the history of slavery. The module encourages students to develop an awareness of how different historical sources are used and think critically about them. In this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars totalling 2 hours per week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Lusophone Identities, Culture, and Modernity in Portugal and Africa  
   
   
   
     In this module you will focus on identities and identity formation, as represented or articulated in literary, cinematic and visual texts, as the basis of a chronological survey of the development of Lusophone societies and culture in the 20th century. You will focus on two particular areas: the political ramifications of contending conceptions of race, gender, and sexuality in the last century and the role of cultural indentity and ‘identity’ politics’ in nation-building and in the negotiation of, and recovery from, collective crises such as regime change and civil conflict. For this module you will have a one 2-hour seminar each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Comparative Modern Literature in the Romance Languages 
   
   
   
     In this module you will be introduced to the major currents in the 20th Century in the context of finisecular and early 20th century European and American literature and culture in order to situate the latter common preoccupations and formal experiments of writers of poetry and short fiction of various nationalities, languages and cultures. This module consists of two case studies split between the Autumn semester where you will focus on the comparative analysis of works by poets such as Rub&eacute;n Dar&iacute;o and Mallarm&eacute;, Apollinaire and Alberti, and Fernando Pessoa among others. In the Spring semester you will you focus on the parallel developments in the evolution of the short story across a similar range of languages and cultures and include an analysis of short fictions from authors such as Jorge Luis Borges, Jo&atilde;o Guimar&atilde;es Rosa, Carlos Fuentes among others. For this module you will have a one 2-hour seminar each week.