Modules  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory
   
   
  
    All are core for single honour students; joint honours get to select a combination of modules: either Media & Society plus Cultures of Everyday Life, or Introduction to Communication & Culture plus Communication & Technology. 
   
   
    
   
   
   
     Language 
    
    
     Study a foreign language of your choosing. Language options include: Arabic, Dutch, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Mandarin Chinese, Russian and Spanish, offered at different levels (including the beginners' level).  
    
   
       
    
   
  
    Media and Society
    
   
   
   
     This module will critically evaluate the central role that the media play in understanding contemporary society; guiding you through a series of key debates around the development, composition and function of different kinds of media: with a particular focus on newspapers, television, film and the internet. As well as examining issues surrounding the social context of the media, the module examines how regulation, self-regulation or consumer sovereignty can ensure the most socially useful news media, and how audiences consume and use media. The module involves three hours of lectures and seminars per week.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Communication and Culture
    
   
   
   
     This module familiarises you with the interdisciplinary fields of communications theory and cultural studies, whilst encouraging you to discriminate between particular theoretical positions. You’ll analyse a range of communicative texts and cultural phenomena. Topics covered include advertising, PR, ideology, activism and intercultural communication. You’ll spend three hours in lectures & seminars each week. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Communication and Technology
    
   
   
   
     Through this module you’ll examine the relationship between communication, the mass media, and technology: with a focus on the cultural impact of the internet, digital media and mobile phones. The module covers the use of these technologies in protest, their impact on news production, their everyday influence and the consequences of the ‘digital divide’. You’ll spend around three hours in lectures and seminars each week studying for this module. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Cultures of Everyday Life
    
   
   
   
     You’ll examine the notion of 'everyday life' as it comes into contact with a range of 19th, 20th and 21st century cultural theories and modes of representation. You’ll appreciate the dense, complex and contradictory nature of day to day experience and examine public consecrated representations of everyday life (e.g. soaps, dramas, museums and archives) with a view to unmasking their ideological effects. You’ll spend around three hours each week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Academic Development  
   
   
    
    This module is designed to support you across your other International Media and Communications modules. You’ll gain skills in independent and collaborative learning with the aid of guided and self-directed learning tasks lasting three hours per week. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Two Modules 
   
  
  
   
    Compulsory:
    
    
   
   
    
    
      Researching Culture, Film and Media 
     
    
    
    
      Introducing you to issues and approaches at stake in culture, film and media research, you’ll become familiarised with a sample of qualitative and quantitative methods for investigating interdisciplinary research topics spending two hours per week in workshops and lectures.
      
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Language  
    
    
     Continue to study the foreign language of your choosing. Language options include: Arabic, Dutch, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Mandarin Chinese, Russian and Spanish, offered at different levels.  
    
   
       
    
   
   
    
   
   
   Optional:   
   
  
    Students choose four modules out of the following options:
    
    
   
     Understanding Cultural Industries
     
    
    
    
      Introducing you to the critical frameworks for understanding the dynamics and processes of the cultural industries, you’ll become familiar with various topics such as: the nature of cultural industry production; specific industrial practices and relations; the construction of markets and audiences; the nature of media work; the influence of technologies and legal regimes on the creation and circulation of media property. During an average week you’ll spend around five hours in lectures and an hour in seminars during study of this module.  
      
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Translating Cultures
     
    
    
    
      This module introduces you to key concepts from inter-cultural communications theory. Using a range of examples and case-studies, you’ll be able to apply comparative analyses that isolate cultural effects on communication. A balance is struck between the ideal of harmonious inter-cultural communication on the one hand, and the richness of cultural diversity on the other. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
     
    
        
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Transnational Media
     
    
    
    
      Building on approaches to national cinema introduced in first-year film modules, you’ll look at recent understandings of post-national and trans-national media, and specifically consider the flows of people, media, technology, ideas, and finances among nations. In particular, you’ll address global media interactions emerging from tensions between cultural homogenisation and heterogenisation. During an average week you’ll have a one hour lecture, one hour seminar and a 2.5 hour workshop. 
     
    
        
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Cultural Politics
     
    
    
    
      This module develops the political dimension of theoretical approaches to culture and communications. You’ll look at everyday forms and practices and highlight the ideological investments in questions of cultural value. Concentrating on race, class, gender, disability and sexuality as areas of inequality which shape, and are shaped by, cultural and communications practices, the course emphasizes the power dynamics at play in processes of cultural production, consumption and control. The programme moves from macro to micro approaches to culture beginning with broad questions around ideology, power and resistance and ending with the particulars of everyday strategies and tactics, spending around three hours in lectures and seminars each week. 
     
    
        
     
    
   
       
    
   
   
   Political Communication, Public Relations and Propaganda
    
   
     This is shown 
    
    
    
      You’ll be given understanding of the different factors underlying the development of political communication, public relations and propaganda and develop analytical and conceptual skills in writing on theoretical and substantive issues concerned with the social and political role of the mass media. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
     
    
        
     
    
   
       
    
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
  
    Hearing Cultures
    
   
   
   
     This module encourages you to think critically about the role of sound in everyday life through a range of historical case studies from the late eighteenth century to the present day. All kinds of sounds are examined in relation to their cultural and social significance, from unwanted sounds such as noise, through to routine and unnoticed sounds such as those of radio and television, through to highly valued sounds such as music. You’ll have a weekly three hour workshop. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Contesting Culture
    
   
   
   
     You’ll examine the contested nature of culture in a variety of contexts through three hours in lectures and seminars. Beginning with a definition that includes the arts and media, you’ll broaden out to consider cultural practices in a range of situations, addressing the key questions: who defines and controls culture and for what purposes and, conversely, what kinds of opportunities exist for cultural and creative resistance? 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Comics and Visual Narrative
    
   
   
   
     You’ll explore the medium of comics both as popular culture and as visual language during three hours of lectures and seminars each week. Beginning with a history of graphic sequential narrative together with an introduction to literary approaches to narrative (narratology), you’ll look at issues around censorship, cultural value, aesthetics and narrative form. Authors will include: Kevin Huizenga, Art Spiegelman, Marjane Satrapi, Chris Ware, Daniel Clowes, Bryan Talbot, Harvey Pekar, Julie Doucett, Joe Sacco, Jeffrey Brown, Neil Gaiman and James Kochalka.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Public Cultures: Protest, Participation and Power
    
   
   
   
     Adopting an interdisciplinary approach to exploring the relationship between public space, politics and technology, you’ll draw on research from a range of fields including: critical theory, cultural studies, cultural geography, digital studies, urban sociology and politics. Spending three hours per week in workshops, you’ll explore the contested and changing nature of public space, through a focus on different instances of social, political and cultural practice.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Self, Sign and Society
    
   
   
   
     This module equips you with the theoretical tools needed to explore how social identity is both asserted and challenged through the deployment of signs broadly conceived. You’ll familiarise yourself with the science of signs known as ‘semiology’ and the impact it has had on psychoanalytic theory and cultural and social criticism. You’ll spend three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    International Media and Communications Studies Dissertation
    
   
   
   
     You will carry out a major individual research project based on issues and concepts taught on the course so far. Your work will demonstrate your skill for critical argument and understanding on the topic and will be supported by individual supervision, resources such as archives and databases, and workshops on research methods throughout the semester.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Representing Reality
    
   
   
   
     You’ll be introduced to the history of documentary and non-fiction film and media, and the debates surrounding how these forms have 'represented reality'. Different documentary image practices will be examined in social and historical context, and through a variety of theoretical perspectives that interrogate their relationship to the real events which they represent. A range of material will be used during three hour workshops, both historical and contemporary, encouraging you to make intellectual connections across different periods, and between different documentary media forms. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Blockbuster
    
   
   
   
     You’ll familiarise yourself with debates surrounding the blockbuster as a phenomenon spending five hours per week in workshops examining the historical contexts within which the blockbuster emerged and examine the reception of the blockbuster.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Language (optional) 
   
  
    Continue to study the foreign language of your choosing. Language options include: Arabic, Dutch, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Mandarin Chinese, Russian and Spanish, offered at different levels. You can substitute language modules with other optional modules offered in Year 3.