Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
  Compulsory 
  
      
   
   
   Introduction to German Studies 
   
   
    
    This year-long module provides an introduction to the study of German and is compulsory for most students of German. It covers the main fields of German Studies: literature, culture, history, linguistics, media and film. You will be introduced to the study skills required for academic study: critical and analytic skills, reading skills, presentation skills and writing skills. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  plus either: 
  
      
   
   
    
    German 1 
    
    
     
     Using up-to-date material from the German-speaking world this core module will help you improve your command of written and spoken German. Continuing with the four skills areas of A-level work (writing, reading, listening, and speaking) you will develop them further through a variety of exercises whilst gaining insights into contemporary German life, culture and politics. For this module you will have one 1-hour grammar lecture each week and three 1-hour tutorials per week where you will work in small groups usually led by German native speakers. In addition you are expected to undertake at least four hours of private study each week. 
     
     
      
     
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
   or 
   
   
    
     German 1 - Beginners  
    
    
     This core module is designed to take beginners in German to a level of written and aural comprehension, writing and speaking skills usually comparable to A-level standard. At the end of the module, you will be able to comprehend and respond to written and aural texts over a comprehensive range of current affairs, cultural and everyday topics and engage in everyday social conversation. In this module you will have four 1-hour seminars and one 1-hour lecture each week.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Plus either: 
   
   
     
   
  
    Media and Society 
   
   
   
     This module will critically evaluate the central role that the media play in understanding contemporary society; guiding you through a series of key debates around the development, composition and function of different kinds of media: with a particular focus on newspapers, television, film and the internet. As well as examining issues surrounding the social context of the media, the module examines how regulation, self-regulation or consumer sovereignty can ensure the most socially useful news media, and how audiences consume and use media. The module involves 3 hours of lectures and seminars per week. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Cultures of Everyday Life 
   
   
   
     You’ll examine the notion of 'everyday life' as it comes into contact with a range of 19th, 20th and 21st century cultural theories and modes of representation. You’ll appreciate the dense, complex and contradictory nature of day to day experience and examine public consecrated representations of everyday life (e.g. soaps, dramas, museums and archives) with a view to unmasking their ideological effects.  You’ll spend around 3 hours each week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.   
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
   or  
  
    Communication and Culture 
   
   
   
     This module familiarises you with the interdisciplinary fields of communications theory and cultural studies, whilst encouraging you to discriminate between particular theoretical positions. You’ll analyse a range of communicative texts and cultural phenomena. Topics covered include advertising, PR, ideology, activism and intercultural communication. You’ll spend 3 hours in lectures & seminars each week.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Communication and Technology 
   
   
   
     Through this module you’ll examine the relationship between communication, the mass media, and technology: with a focus on the cultural impact of the internet, digital media and mobile phones. The module covers the use of these technologies in protest, their impact on news production, their everyday influence and the consequences of the ‘digital divide’. You’ll spend around 3 hours in lectures and seminars each week studying for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
  
    Reading German Literature I 
   
   
   
     In this module you will be introduced to the critical reading and textual analysis of German narrative literature and poetry from the late 18th century to today. You will study two mid-length narrative texts and a selection of poems which represent key phases and aspects of German literary and cultural development from ‘Goethezeit’ to the post-1945 and contemporary period. In analysing and discussing a range of texts and authors, you will be introduced to key concepts and techniques of textual analysis, to the structures of narrative and poetry, and to selected themes and developments in literary criticism. The module combines one 1-hour introductory lecture per week with in-depth study in small tutorial groups (one 1-hour tutorial per week), in addition you will undertake four hours of private study per week. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Reading German Culture 
   
   
   
     In this module you will learn to analyse short literary and popular texts (including film) which portray life in the metropolis Berlin and represent  key phases in German historical and social development in the 20th Century: the 1920s, the immediate post war-period, post-unification Berlin. Exploring cultural representations of urban life the course will address key questions such as: How do textual perceptions of the ‘big’ city reflect attitudes towards relationships conditioned by class, gender and race? For this module you will have one 2-hour seminars each week in addition to four hours of private study. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Linguistics 1: The Sounds of German 
   
  
    This module investigates the sounds of German and how they can be described accurately (“phonetics and phonology”). Students will learn to transcribe German using the notation of the International Phonetic Association, and we will look in particular at aspects of German pronunciation that are hard to master because they are different to English or similar to French. We will also look at how foreign words (including English words) are integrated into the German sound system, and at regional variation in spoken German. Developing accurate listening and transcription skills will form a major part of the module. There will be a one hour lecture and a one hour workshop each week, in addition to four hours private study time. 
   
  
      
   
      
  
 
     
  
     
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Researching Culture, Film and Media 
   
  
    Introducing you to issues and approaches at stake in culture, film and media research, you’ll become familiarised with a sample of qualitative and quantitative methods for investigating interdisciplinary research topics spending 2 hours per week in workshops and lectures. 
   
  
      
   
      
   Plus either:  
  
    German 2 
   
   
   
     This core module consolidates your proficiency in the four skill areas of German Language 1 (writing, reading, listening, and speaking) in order to develop these further. Using contemporary material this module is also tailor-made to prepare you for the period you will spend in a German-speaking country studying, working or teaching. It includes German CV writing, interview preparations, presentations, translation from and into German and advanced grammar work. For this module you will be taught in small groups, usually by German native speakers. You will have one 2-hour seminar and one 1- hour grammar tutorial each week in addition to a minimum of four hours of private study. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   or  
  
    German 2 - Beginners 
   
  
    This module will consolidate your proficiency in the four skill areas of the German language (writing, reading, listening and speaking) and develop these further. You will work with texts from newspapers and other sources, which will be used for discussion of translation issues and grammatical structures, linguistic analysis and textual comparison, oral presentation, and essay writing. The module will use texts that cover a broad range of general, journalistic and academic topics, as well as those that will help to prepare students for living, working and studying during their year abroad. You will have one 1-hour lecture and four 1-hour tutorials per week in addition to private study. 
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Understanding Cultural Industries 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to the critical frameworks for understanding the dynamics and processes of the cultural industries, you’ll become familiar with various topics such as: the nature of cultural industry production; specific industrial practices and relations; the construction of markets and audiences; the nature of media work; the influence of technologies and legal regimes on the creation and circulation of media property. During an average week you’ll spend around 5 hours in lectures and an hour in seminars during study of this module.   
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Translating Cultures 
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to key concepts from inter-cultural communications theory. Using a range of examples and case-studies, you’ll be able to apply comparative analyses that isolate cultural effects on communication. A balance is struck between the ideal of harmonious inter-cultural communication on the one hand, and the richness of cultural diversity on the other. You’ll spend around 3 hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    New German Cinema 
   
   
   
     Between the mid 1960s and the mid 1980s West German cinema rose to new national and international success due to the work of a number of young directors who were commonly perceived as representatives of a "New" or "Young" German cinema. This module will analyse selected films from this period. You will be introduced to the individual styles of different directors (Fassbinder, Herzog, Wenders) as well as to their common thematic preoccupations. The analysis will aim to situate the "New German Cinema" within the contexts both of the development of the film industry and of contemporary social and political developments in West Germany. You will have one 2-hour seminar and one 1-hour workshop per week in addition to four hours of private study. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Media in Germany 
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to explore the history of print and broadcasting in Germany from 1933 to  the 1990s,  and investigate the relationship between media content and culture. You will develop a foundation in the key concepts of media studies and gain insight into the connection of media and ideology. For this module you will have one 2-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Life and Demise of the GDR 
   
  
    This module investigates social developments in GDR society over four decades of communist rule and social changes in Eastern Germany after the demise of the GDR. Students will be introduced to the ideological principles which that the Socialist Unity Party attempted to legitimize in the GDR as the only viable alternative to fascism for a modern society. We will then look at how this ideology was enforced through state authority in every domain of society. Based on contemporary texts (e.g. GDR propaganda, GDR writers and other intellectuals) we will further examine how people negotiated their lives within these officially imposed ideological structures, exploring a range of individual responses from conformism to non-conformism and opposition. Finally we will look at a new kind of “public authority” during the Wende period in the GDR, which triggered the disintegration of communist power structures, and the subsequent changes in East German society. For this module you will have a one 2-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study. 
   
  
      
   
      
  
 
     
  
     
  
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   
   You will spend your third year abroad in Germany, you will be able to study at one of our partner  universities, take on a work placement or work as an assistant in a school.  Please see the Department of German Studies Year Abroad 
  webpage 
  or contact the  
  Department of Culture, Film and Media
   for more information.
   
   
  
 
     
  
     
  
   Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    German 3 
   
   
   
     This core module aims to consolidate the high level of language skills you will have acquired during the time spent in a German-speaking country in Year 3.  You will further refine your advanced proficiency in written and spoken German, usually with support from a native speaker. Contemporary texts and discussions of up-to-date topics are a key feature of this module and you will be encouraged to build on the knowledge and skills acquired during your year abroad. For this module you will have two 1-hour seminars each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Translation from German 
   
   
   
     This core module will enhance your practical command and effective understanding of written and German and English on the basis of your progress during your year abroad, through translation of a variety of German texts and passages. This module will develop your translation skills towards professional standards for translation into English. For this module you will have one 2-hour seminar each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional 
   
  
    Film and Media dissertation 
   
   
   
     You’ll write a 10, 000-word dissertation, mainly through independent study on an approved topic of your choice, under the supervision of a member of staff within the department.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Culture and Society in the Weimar Republic 
   
   
   
     The Weimar Republic (1919-1933) was one of the most fascinating and culturally productive periods of German history, but it was equally ridden by crises and violent conflicts. This module aims to introduce central issues in the literary and social developments of Weimar Germany. You will study a wide range of materials (literary texts, film, aesthetic and political programmes) to analyse key features of the period. Topics will include the impact of the Great War, developments in the press and the cinema, political confrontations, cabaret, and unemployment. You will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Representing Reality 
   
   
   
     You’ll be introduced to the history of documentary and non-fiction film and media, and the debates surrounding how these forms have 'represented reality'. Different documentary image practices will be examined in social and historical context, and through a variety of theoretical perspectives that interrogate their relationship to the real events which they represent. A range of material will be used during 3 hour workshops, both historical and contemporary, encouraging you to make intellectual connections across different periods, and between different documentary media forms.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Blockbuster 
   
   
   
     You’ll familiarise yourself with debates surrounding the blockbuster as a phenomenon spending 5 hours per week in workshops examining the historical contexts within which the blockbuster emerged and examine the reception of the blockbuster. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Comics and Visual Narrative 
   
   
   
     You’ll explore the medium of comics both as popular culture and as visual language during 3 hours of lectures and seminars each week. Beginning with a history of graphic sequential narrative together with an introduction to literary approaches to narrative (narratology), you’ll look at issues around censorship, cultural value, aesthetics and narrative form. Authors will include: Kevin Huizenga, Art Spiegelman, Marjane Satrapi, Chris Ware, Daniel Clowes, Bryan Talbot, Harvey Pekar, Julie Doucett, Joe Sacco, Jeffrey Brown, Neil Gaiman and James Kochalka. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  
    'Heimat' in the German Cinema 
   
  
    Heimat, a political and psychological concept of rural rootedness, is at the core of German identity, and the Heimat genre has been ever-present in the German cinema since the days of the silent cinema. This module will explore the cultural and historical contexts of the concept of Heimat through the study of Heimat films from different historical moments. We will explore the artistically ambitious and politically controversial 1920s/30s mountain films; the immensely popular Heimat films of the 1950s; the aesthetically challenging and critical anti-Heimat films of the 1960s/70s; Edgar Reitz’s landmark historical saga of the 1980s; and post-1990s reinventions of the genre. We shall ask why film-makers in Germany and Austria keep returning to this genre. In addition we shall consider the question of the alien within the Heimat, the gendering of Heimat and the representation of nature and modernity in these films. You will have a two hour seminar, a one hour syndicate workshop, a two hour screening, plus extensive independent study each week.