Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Spanish 1 
   
   
   
     This module will combine revision of grammar with intensive exposure to a variety of types and registers of written and spoken Spanish, concentrating on appropriate thematic areas. It will consolidate and build on basic written, aural and oral language skills through spending 3 hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Plus either
   
  
    Communication and Culture 
   
   
   
     This module familiarises you with the interdisciplinary fields of communications theory and cultural studies, whilst encouraging you to discriminate between particular theoretical positions. You’ll analyse a range of communicative texts and cultural phenomena. Topics covered include advertising, PR, ideology, activism and intercultural communication. You’ll spend 3 hours in lectures & seminars each week.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Communication and Technology 
   
   
   
     Through this module you’ll examine the relationship between communication, the mass media, and technology: with a focus on the cultural impact of the internet, digital media and mobile phones. The module covers the use of these technologies in protest, their impact on news production, their everyday influence and the consequences of the ‘digital divide’. You’ll spend around 3 hours in lectures and seminars each week studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Or
   
  
    Media and Society 
   
   
   
     This module will critically evaluate the central role that the media play in understanding contemporary society. With a particular focus on newspapers, television, film and the internet, you will be guided through a series of key debates around the development, composition and function of different kinds of media. As well as examining issues surrounding the social context of the media, the module examines how regulation, self-regulation or consumer sovereignty can ensure the most socially useful news media, and how audiences consume and use media. The module involves three hours of lectures and seminars per week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Cultures of Everyday Life 
   
   
   
     You’ll examine the notion of 'everyday life' as it comes into contact with a range of 19th, 20th and 21st century cultural theories and modes of representation. You’ll appreciate the dense, complex and contradictory nature of day to day experience and examine public consecrated representations of everyday life (e.g. soaps, dramas, museums and archives) with a view to unmasking their ideological effects.  You’ll spend around 3 hours each week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
  
    Spain and Portugal in the Twentieth Century 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll study the evolution of Spanish and Portuguese history, politics and culture from 1898 to the present day. You’ll be encouraged to draw links between the Portuguese and Spanish experiences, and place both countries’ experience of the twentieth century within the broader context of European and wider global history in this period. Particular emphasis will be placed upon the development of both countries from a (perceived) position of ‘difference’ and ‘backwardness’ to relatively prosperous, economically developed and culturally diverse members of the European Union. You’ll spend 2 hours in classes each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the History of Modern Latin America 
   
   
   
     In this module you will be introduced to the main patterns of Latin American political, economic and social history between the late colonial period and the mid-to-late 20th Century which will give you a thorough grounding of the major issues, themes and forces that have shaped the societies in the region. In one part of the module you will study the history of the Spanish-speaking America and in the other half consider the history of Brazil and aspects such as the various patterns of change and development of the region and political radicalism. For this module you will have a one 1-hour lecture and a one 1-hour seminar each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Literature in Spanish 
   
   
   
     You’ll read a series of key texts from Spain and Spanish America. Its purpose is to impart an essential body of literary-historical and cultural knowledge relating to the main periods, genres and conventions of literature in Spanish from the Middle Ages to the modern period. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  
 
     
  
     
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
   
    
    Spanish 2
     
    
   
   
   
     This module will build on grammatical knowledge and communication skills developed in “Lengua Espanola I”. Written classes will concentrate on developing essay writing skills in Spanish using a range of Spanish texts as stimuli. Special attention will be given to developing complex sentence structures and rhetorical devices. Laboratory classes will use a range of contemporary audio-visual materials from Spanish and Latin-American. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Researching Culture, Film and Media 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to issues and approaches at stake in culture, film and media research, you’ll become familiarised with a sample of qualitative and quantitative methods for investigating interdisciplinary research topics spending 2 hours per week in workshops and lectures. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
  
    Hispanic Visual Culture 
   
   
   
     In this module you will be given a general introduction to cinema and painting in the Hispanic and Lusophone worlds. In the first semester you will be introduced to painting in Spain, Portugal, and Latin America from the late 15th century to the early 19th century with an emphasis on how to analyse paintings and understand the styles and contexts from which paintings emerge. In the 2nd semester you will examine contemporary cinema from Spain and Latin America addressing questions of style, socio-historical context and narrative context. In this module you will have 2 hours of classes per week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Modern Spanish and Spanish American Literature and Film 
   
   
   
     This module explores a cultural period in the Hispanic world characterised by profound social change and the emergence of major world-figures of modern art (e.g. Picasso). It is structured around key literary and artistic movements from Spain and Spanish America from the early nineteenth century to the latter part of the twentieth, movements such as Romanticism, Realism, Symbolism-Decadence/Modernismo, the Avant-garde, and Modernism. You’ll spend two hours per week in classes.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Metropolis, Empire and Republics 
   
   
   
     This module examines the evolution of Spain, Portugal and their American colonies in the four centuries of Iberian colonialism between 1492 and the movements for independence in Latin America in the 19th Century.  In the first half of the module you will consider the development and nature of medieval and Renaissance Iberia and the second half of the module examines the nature of society in pre-Columbian America, after which students are introduced to the processes of discovery, conquest and early colonisation. For this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Renaissance and Baroque Culture in Spain in Text, Image and Film 
   
   
   
     This module provides you with a comprehensive overview of the history of Iberian Renaissance and Baroque culture (1500-1650). During this period, known as the Golden Age or Siglo de Oro, Spain possessed the greatest empire in the world, extending from the Iberian Peninsula to South and Central America, and the Pacific Ocean. Spain was also a leader in the arts; her output in poetry, fiction, theatre, and painting rivalled that of all other countries in quantity and quality. The module provides an introduction to this rich Golden Age culture by looking at selected masterpieces of literature and painting, together with aspects of the philosophy and history of the period. To give a sense of the cultural legacy of the age, it also examines modern versions and film adaptations of these classics, and of comparable works by Shakespeare. You’ll spend two hours per week in classes. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Understanding Cultural Industries 
   
   
   
     Introducing you to the critical frameworks for understanding the dynamics and processes of the cultural industries, you’ll become familiar with various topics such as: the nature of cultural industry production; specific industrial practices and relations; the construction of markets and audiences; the nature of media work; the influence of technologies and legal regimes on the creation and circulation of media property. During an average week you’ll spend around 5 hours in lectures and an hour in seminars during study of this module.   
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Translating Cultures 
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to key concepts from inter-cultural communications theory. Using a range of examples and case-studies, you’ll be able to apply comparative analyses that isolate cultural effects on communication. A balance is struck between the ideal of harmonious inter-cultural communication on the one hand, and the richness of cultural diversity on the other. You’ll spend around 3 hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Transnational Media 
   
   
   
     Building on approaches to national cinema introduced in first-year film modules, you’ll look at recent understandings of post-national and trans-national media, and specifically consider the flows of people, media, technology, ideas, and finances among nations. In particular, you’ll address global media interactions emerging from tensions between cultural homogenisation and heterogenisation. During an average week you’ll have a one hour lecture, one hour seminar and a 2.5 hour workshop. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
  
 
     
  
     
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
   
  
    In your third year of study you will spend the academic year abroad in Spain and/or Spanish America. You will be supported by our Year Abroad officer in preparation for this period in Year Two. You have the option to undertake study at a University, do a work placement or work as a language teaching assistant.  
   
   
    For more information, please visit the Department of Spanish, Portuguese and Latin American Studies 
   webpage. 
   
   
    
   
   
  
 
     
  
     
  
   Typical Year Four Modules   
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Spanish 3 
   
   
   
     This is a module for all students of Spanish language, and will consist of 3 hours per week of oral work and writing skills. Recognising that significant progress will have been made in colloquial and informal language skills during the Year Abroad, this module intends to introduce you to a more formal and sophisticated register of spoken and written Spanish using print, off-air and internet sources. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
   
    
    Advanced Spanish Translation
     
    
   
   
   
     This module offers coaching and practice in high-level translation from Spanish to English. You will work with a variety of texts over the semester, exploring different registers in Spanish and English, and equivalences between source and target languages. You will be required to reflect on the process of translation through annotations on specific translation decisions which will be part of the given task each week. You will also be given a brief for each translation and asked to research the target publication/context for their translation and specify ways in which the target context may differ from the original.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Spanish American Narrative 
   
   
   
     You’ll explore the work of key writers in 20th Century Spanish America, all of whom bear the recognisable imprint of literary Modernism. You will closely study two writers of what has become known as the ‘Boom’(namely, Gabriel Garc&iacute;a M&aacute;rquez and Julio Cort&aacute;zar); and three precursors of that generation (Jorge Luis Borges, Alejo Carpentier and Juan Rulfo). The module will examine the ways in which they make use of myth, the fantastic and experimental narrative techniques to write about history, traditional, popular and/or mass culture, gender and sexuality. You will have a one 2-hour class each week.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
    
    The Radicalisation of Nationalism in Modern Latin America: Cuban Revolution in Continental Perspective
     
    
   
   
   
     This module is concerned with the emergence, nature and evolution of the Cuban Revolution.  You will consider the Revolution in question within a wider historical and ideological context: the Latin American tradition of an increasingly radical nationalism. Dating from the 19th and early 20th century this is a time when there was a need to engage in serious and collective nation-building. The module therefore examines how the Cuban Revolution went on to influence the subsequent radicalisation of that tradition, shaping a range of political manifestation. For this module you will have a one 2-hour class each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Hearing Cultures 
   
   
   
     This module encourages you to think critically about the role of sound in everyday life through a range of historical case studies from the late eighteenth century to the present day. All kinds of sounds are examined in relation to their cultural and social significance, from unwanted sounds such as noise, through to routine and unnoticed sounds such as those of radio and television, through to highly valued sounds such as music. You’ll have a weekly three hour workshop.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Contesting Culture 
   
   
   
     You’ll examine the contested nature of culture in a variety of contexts through 3 hours in lectures and seminars. Beginning with a definition that includes the arts and media, you’ll broaden out to consider cultural practices in a range of situations, addressing the key questions: who defines and controls culture and for what purposes and, conversely, what kinds of opportunities exist for cultural and creative resistance? 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Comics and Visual Narrative 
   
   
   
     You’ll explore the medium of comics both as popular culture and as visual language during 3 hours of lectures and seminars each week. Beginning with a history of graphic sequential narrative together with an introduction to literary approaches to narrative (narratology), you’ll look at issues around censorship, cultural value, aesthetics and narrative form. Authors will include: Kevin Huizenga, Art Spiegelman, Marjane Satrapi, Chris Ware, Daniel Clowes, Bryan Talbot, Harvey Pekar, Julie Doucett, Joe Sacco, Jeffrey Brown, Neil Gaiman and James Kochalka.