Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory
   
   
  
    Studying The Greek World 
   
  
    This wide-ranging module introduces you to the history, literature and art of the Greek World from 1600BC-31BC; the period from the Bronze Age to the point when Greece becomes part of the Roman Empire; no prior knowledge of the Greek world is required. You will also consider other major chapters of Greece’s history from the Mycenean Period and the Dark Ages, to the rise of the polis in the Archaic period. You will also explore developments in Greek literary and artistic culture as well as consider aspects of the reception of ancient Greece in modern western culture. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week over the course of 10 weeks.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Studying The Roman World 
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to the history, literature and art of the Roman world from the beginnings of the city of Rome to the fall of the Roman Empire in the West.  You will examine all many important aspects of Rome’s history such as the Roman Republic, the rise of the empire, the establishment of the Principate, and the fall of Rome. At the same time you will explore developments in Roman literary and artistic culture, and consider aspects of the reception of ancient Rome in modern western culture. In addition, you will also examine the relationship of the Roman world to the Greek world which complements the Autumn semester module ‘Studying the Greek World'. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week. 
     
     
    
   
  
      
   
      
  Optional
   
   
  
    Latin Texts: 1 
   
   
   This module is targeted at those students who have a good A-level pass in Latin. This module studies a Latin literary text and begins the systematic revision of grammar to be completed in 'Latin Texts: 2'. This module will reinforce your knowledge of the Latin language and develop your ability to read Latin with fluency and understanding. Examples of texts read: Lucretius 1, Virgil's Eclogues, Propertius 4, Tacitus' Agricola. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and three 1-hour lectures each week. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Latin Texts: 2 
   
   
   This module studies a Latin literary text and continues the systematic revision of grammar begun in Q81LT1 Latin texts: 1. The Latin Texts: 2 module reinforces and further develops your ability to read Latin with fluency and understanding. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and three 1-hour lectures each week. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory
   
   
  
    Extended Source Study 
   
   
   This module is designed to develop your skills of research, analysis and written presentation in preparation for your third year dissertation. You will be expected to write a 5,000 word essay chosen from a range of worksheet topics, each focusing on a single piece of ancient source material. You will be provided with a topic for investigation, starter bibliography and tips on how to approach the question. The questions will suggest a range of possible approaches from evaluation of historical source material to exploration of literary effects, relationships with other material, discussion of context or reception.  A number of seminars and consultation sessions will be help you approach and develop your source study. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one 2-hour seminar over a period of 10 weeks.  
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Classics and Popular Culture 
   
   
   For this module you will explore the reception of Ancient Greek and Roman culture in modern popular media such as films, novels, museums, architecture, children’s literature and comics with the aim of understanding how these receptions influence the way Greek and Roman culture is approached, used and questioned. Lectures may focus on the following: classical education for the 18th century, the influences of the Classics on the production and content of modern literature and/or cinema, the establishing of museums, and the use and abuse of the Classics in political and philosophical debate. For this module you will have two 2-hour sessions a week, 15 lectures and workshops and five seminars.  
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Studying Classical Scholarship 
   
   
    A partner module to Q82ESS (Extended Source Study), which focused on primary ancient source material, this module focuses on the history and development of scholarship on ancient Greece and Rome and on specific scholarly theories, approaches and methods. The module is assessed principally by a 4500-5000 word essay based on one of a number of worksheets ('Scholarship Case Studies'), which explore the place and significance of a particular work of modern scholarship in academic approaches to a given topic in ancient art, history or literature. Studying this work in its socio-political context and the merits and limitations of its scholarly approach will develop your skills of research and analysis, as preparation for your 3rd-year dissertation. The worksheets will change each year depending on the staff involved. They may cover themes such as Race; Gender; Sexuality; Slavery; approaches such as Marxist, Fascist or liberal democratic interpretations of the Ancient World; topics such as Athenian democracy, Sparta, or the decline of Rome; or analytical methods such as Commentaries, Translation, Comparison or Anthropological Paradigms. For your worksheet, you will be provided with a topic for investigation, a starter bibliography and tips on how to approach the question. A number of seminars and consultation sessions will be held in order to help you approach and develop your study. At one of the seminars you will give an assessed oral presentation on an aspect of the worksheet.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Latin Texts: 3 
   
   
    This module examines, in the original Latin, a text representative of an author, genre, period or theme of Latin literature, paying close attention to matters of language and style. In recent years, themes have included: Flavian personal poetry (Martial and Statius); Roman comedy (Plautus and Terence); the emperor Claudius (Suetonius and Tacitus). Literary appreciation and linguistic skills are developed through detailed analysis of original Latin. The module will not just be about literature: you will also explore the text's relationship with its social, political and cultural context. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one 1-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Intermediate Latin: 2 
   
  
    This module builds on your experience of 'Intermediate Latin 1', and gives further support in dealing with unadapted Latin texts, as well as continuing to revise and consolidate the grammar and syntax learnt in 'Beginners' Latin'. You will read a text such as Cicero Pro Archia, Virgil Aeneid 2 in some depth, and practise close reading of Latin and other exercises that you will take further in Advanced Latin.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Ancient Faces 
   
  
    What can a face tell us? This module explores Greek and Roman portrait sculptures, how and why they were made, where they stood, and what they stood for. Topics covered include: the features necessary to call a depiction of a face a portrait; the relationship of face and body in the shaping of a portrait; the emergence of the portrait in Greek art, portraits of Greek generals and statesmen, Hellenistic female portraiture, and how to analyse marble portraits by means of 3D technology among others. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture per week and five 1-hour seminars over the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Independent Second-Year Project 
   
   
   In this module you will have the opportunity to expand your knowledge of the Classical world in an area that interests you, and to experiment with a method of communicating that knowledge which is different from the usual assessment practices of essay-writing, exam writing and seminar-presentation. There are various options in this module including undertaking research which leads to the construction of a database, acquiring a communication method which could be of use in a future career or experimenting using a different medium of communication e.g. video, website, creative writing, classroom lesson plan. The topic and form of the project chosen must both be approved by the module convener, and a supporting portfolio documenting your research forms part of the assessment, alongside the project itself. For this module you will have a combination of lectures, tutorials, seminars, computing sessions and workshops. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Love in Augustan Rome 
   
  
    In this module you will undertake a detailed study, in translation, of the Latin elegiac poet Propertius, with reference to other poets of the same genre (Catullus, Gallus, Tibullus, Ovid). The module takes a cross-cultural perspective on writing love poetry: what does it mean to say ‘I love you’ and how do different cultures do it? You will also be looking at real women and imaginary mistresses, masculinity and counter-cultural posturing, allusion and literary credibility, poetry and politics. The text will be read in the translation of Guy Lee (Oxford World’s Classics 1996). For this module you will have a 1-hour seminar every fortnight and a one 1-hour lecture each week over 10 week period. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Constantine 
   
   
    The emperor Constantine (306-337) had a significant impact on the Roman Empire and on European history in the longer-term, above all through his support for Christianity, but also through his foundation of the city of Constantinople. This module aims to place his reign in its wider context - the turmoil experienced by the Roman Empire during the third century, the recovery of stability under Diocletian and the Tetrarchy, the emergence of the Christian church as a significant feature of the empire's religious landscape, and the new military challenges which the empire faced in the form of Persia and northern barbarian groups – and to assess Constantine’s policies on a range of fronts: religious, military and social. This semester-long 10 credit module involves one 1-hour lecture each week and a fortnightly 1-hour seminar, and is assessed by an exam.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Latin Texts 5 
   
  
    This module examines, in the original Latin, a range of texts representative of an author, genre, period or theme of Latin literature, paying special attention to matters of language and style. Literary appreciation and linguistic skills are developed through detailed analysis of the original Latin. The position of the texts in the development of the genre will be explored, as well as their relationship with their social context. In 2014/15 the module focused on a selection of Martial’s epigrams and Statius 
   Silvae 
    2, studying the poems as part of life in Flavian Rome. Themes included: the emperor, patronage, daily life, gender and sexuality, genre, satire, the city of Rome.  
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
  
    Dissertation 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be able to carry out an in-depth investigation of a chosen area, to be agreed with your supervisor in advance. The topic will usually be based on an area you have covered in previous modules. You’ll use the skills that your degree has equipped you with thus far to complete the work required. There will be a mix of contact to achieve this including one-to-one tutorials with your supervisor, workshops and lectures.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Augustus 
   
  
    The year-long Special Subject module involves three hours of seminars per week, and provides an opportunity for intensive study of one of the most influential figures in Roman history. It examines the ways in which, after his victory in the civil wars, Augustus established his rule over the Roman world on a secure and generally acceptable basis. Attention is paid to the ancient sources (studied in translation): these include not only historical and literary texts, but inscriptions, coins, art and architecture. This module covers not only political aspects of the theme but also Augustus' impact on society, religion, culture, and ideology. It is assessed through a combination of coursework essays, formal presentation and exam.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Imperial Biography 
   
  
    This module considers the genre of literature known as Imperial Biography: that is, biographies written about the Roman Emperors. In particular, it will focus on Suetonius' 
   Lives of the Caesars and the anonymous text known as the 
   Historia Augusta. The module will not only look at the limitations of the genre as a whole in relation to its structure and sources, but it will also look at major themes within the lives and key case studies of specific examples - ranging from physiognomics and appearance, to gender and sexuality, omens and portents, religion and philosophy, administration and empire-building, birth and death scenes and so on - all in relation to specific emperors such as Augustus, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Vespasian, Domitian, Hadrian, Marcus Aurelius, Commodus and Elagabalus. This semester-long 10-credit module has one 1-hour lecture per week and one 1-hour seminar every two weeks, and is assessed by an exam.