Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Business Economics 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the microeconomic theory of the market and the firm. Topics covered include: Market Demand; Supply and Equilibrium; Firm Production and Costs; Market Structure; Perfect Competition; Monopolistic Competition; Oligopoly; Monopoly; Consumer Theory and Market Failure.  You will have 10 two-hour lectures and four one-hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Consumers and Markets 
   
   
    This module will cover the ways in which marketing and consumption drive business and shape society. It will provide an historical perspective, consider marketing professions and leadership within organisational contexts, and examine contemporary environments for marketing and consumption with particular attention to globalisation, innovation (including the transformative force of new technologies), and ethical and sustainability issues.  You will have 11 two-hour lectures and two one-hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Managing Operations in the Digital Enterprise 
   
   
    In this module, you will study the Digital Enterprise, which will provide an integrated overview of Operations Management and Information Systems; key technology trends such as cloud and mobile computing; manufacturing systems design and management including lean thinking and  business process re-engineering; service operations design and management, including operations planning and control; supply chain design and management; Customer Relationship Management; Business Intelligence and analytics.  You will have 11 90 minute lectures, four one-hour seminars and five computer laboratory sessions.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Organisational Behaviour 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the basic ideas of organisational behaviour. The content will encourage you to develop an understanding of managing and developing people within business organisations. The module will draw its primary material from the major theorists and theories of both organisational psychology and organisational behaviour. The module will also develop links with other aspects of the business school curriculum such as general management and international business. Y ou will have 11 two-hour lectures and a one hour tutorial across the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Work and Society 
   
   
    This module explores the nature of work and society. The module will look at the development of our understanding of work and society. The development of the industrial and the post-industrial society will be explored and its impact on the nature of work, organisation and management. There will be a historical and critical review of the schools of thought and key writers. Examples of research into individual and group experiences of work, organisation and management will be discussed.  You will have 22 one-hour lectures and one two-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Analysis for Business
    
   
   
    This module provides a grounding in practical aspects of quantitative analysis with an emphasis on understanding and analysis of data. You will learn to apply statistical techniques to formulate and solve quantitative business problems as well as develop skills in the use of spreadsheets for statistical analysis and in interpreting statistical results. A group project forms part of the assessment allowing you to improve your team working and management skills. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures, five one-hour example classes and three one-hour computer labs.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Entrepreneurship and Business
    
   
   
    This module presents a formal analysis of entrepreneurship in theory and practice leading on to a consideration of creativity and business concept generation. You’ll have 11 two-hour lectures with the module concluding with the practical application of these theories and concepts in a business planning and business concept presentation. Y
     ou will have 11 two-hour lectures with the module concluding with the practical application of these theories and concepts in a business planning and business concept presentation.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Business and Economy of China
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to the economy, business, institutions and economically-related political aspects of contemporary China with a focus on the reform period. You will gain an overview of macro and micro-economic environment, institutional and political factors that affect business and development in China, as well as major economic sectors in China. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture to study for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Contemporary China
    
   
   
    This is an introductory module designed to provide you with an overview of contemporary China and help you establish a foundation of knowledge and skills to pursue more advanced studies of China in your later years of study. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture to study for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Mandarin  
   
   
    If you have no prior knowledge of the language, you will be taught to speak, read, write and understand materials in Mandarin relating to everyday situations. The basic structure of the language is introduced through topics related to giving and requesting personal information. If you have prior knowledge of the language, you will be able to develop your speaking and comprehension skills. There is emphasis on extracting and processing authentic language and instruction in Mandarin is increasingly used.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Optional  
   
   Insurance in a Risky World 
   
   
    This module provides you with an introduction to the demand for and supply of insurance. The module examines how insurance markets operate to satisfy commercial and individual customers' demand for protection against risk, and would usually include topics such as private and social insurance, the historical development of insurance, the supply of insurance, Lloyd's and the London Insurance Market, how insurance is distributed to consumers, the role of insurance in the economy, international aspects of insurance and insurance and catastrophes.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Managing Tourism and the Environment: Conflict or Consensus 
   
  
       
   
  
      
   
  
    New Venture Creation
    
   
   
    New Venture Creation will engage you in the more practical elements of innovation and enterprise activity, in terms of creating new businesses and entrepreneurship within the corporate environment. You will become prepared for enterprise activity across a variety of contexts. You will have 11 two-hour seminars, seven hours lecture-based learning and four hours of mentored group work/practical enterprise activity.
      
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules 
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Contemporary Economic Policy
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to the nature and scope of the macroeconomic policy agenda, and develops the analytical frameworks necessary for the evaluation of policy instruments. The module enables you to understand the economic arguments that underlie different views and to evaluate relevant arguments. You will have 10 two-hour lectures and three 1-hour tutorials to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Human Resource Management 
   
   
    This module introduces the basic concepts of Human Resource Management (HRM), puts these concepts in broader perspective and subjects them to critical analysis. Areas covered will include HRM models, Recruitment and selection, Appraisal and pay, Training, Job design, Work-life balance and HRM and performance. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing Management 
   
  
     
   This module focuses on the management of marketing with reference to the ways in which organisations compete with different product-market offers.  Particular attention is paid to the processes involved in the development of a marketing strategy and to the ways in which such strategies evolve and are managed.                                                               
   
  
      
   
  
    Technology and Organisation 
   
   
    This module will examine a number of technologies, including cloud computing, 3D printing, nanotechnology, genetic modification, synthetic biology, artificial intelligence, robotics, genetic medicine and bioprinting, in the context of wider sustainability issues. You will also explore the broader themes of convergence, technological determinism, transhumanism and the Singularity. You will have 11 90 minute lectures plus two one-hour seminars, one ten-minute video and seven podcasts.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Strategic Management: Content and Analysis 
   
   
    This module examines the different approaches to - and techniques of - strategic management including analysis of the external and internal environments, the nature of competitive advantage and the development of the firm.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional   
  
    Introduction to Business Operations 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the scope and importance of operations management in both service and manufacturing businesses. The content of the module will be explored using a variety of management games and includes how IT and knowledge management is used to support operations, strategies for success in manufacturing operations, planning and forecasting, infrastructure development, how to gain competitive advantage through the effective management of the supply chain, the virtual enterprise, and achieving, managing and measuring quality. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Innovation 
   
   
    In this module, you will cover topics including: innovation in the history of economic thought, basic concepts in the economics of innovation, Intellectual property, economics of networks, standards and dominant designs, the entrepreneur, innovation, demand and consumption, clusters, innovation and the division of labour, innovation, competitiveness and trade, policy for innovation. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour tutorials.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Finance 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to basic corporate and personal finance concepts, including the time value of money, financial markets, shares and bonds, financial risk and return, raising money, and the elements of investment. You will 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour workshops.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Corporate Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management 
   
   
    This module develops an understanding of corporate entrepreneurship (CE) and an appreciation of how larger firms can be designed to be more entrepreneurial, flexible and innovative. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Managing Tourism and Environment: Conflict or Consensus? 
   
   
    The module will examine and explore: the interactions between and the management of tourism and the environment, the emergence of environmentally-concerned consumers and the implications of different environmental paradigms for tourism development, debates surrounding the environmental and economic impacts of tourism and the role played by pressure groups in influencing tourism development. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Inter Faculty Mandarin Chinese 2a
    
   
   
    This module assumes a basic knowledge of the language at approximately GCSE standard - it is, however, recognised that the GCSE may have been taken several years ago and the courses are designed to revise and develop basic structures. The four skills of reading, listening, speaking and writing are expanded to enable participation in discussions with reasonable fluency and accuracy. You will have a two-hour seminar and one-hour practical each week to study for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Environment and Development in China I
    
   
   
    Introducing you to the long-term environmental challenges faced by China, you will review the critical issues that China’s successive development policies have given rise to over time through a weekly two-hour lecture. These issues will be studied within the physical, human and regional geography of the country as well as within the context of the political, economic and social changes that China has experienced during the past century. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    The Rise of Modern China
    
   
   
    This module covers the history of China from the 1840s, through to the establishment of the People’s Republic in 1949. It looks at social, cultural, political and economic developments in this period from a variety of angles and approaches. You will spend around two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Social Change and Public Policy in China's Reform Era
    
   
   
    Through this module you’ll acquire the necessary theoretical and practical skills to analyse public policies in China. You’ll be encouraged to think critically about policy models and contrast them with evolving practices of public policy making in China. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture to study for this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Contemporary Developments in Human Resource Management 
   
   
    This module examines a number of advanced topics in the area of Human Resource Management and you will cover topics including employment regulation; equality and diversity; voice and participation.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Strategic Management: Process and Practice 
   
   
    This module examines the managerial and organisational factors that influence the formation and subsequent realisation of strategy. The module enables you to develop skills in the analysis of strategic processes, with particular reference to the role of leadership, change, learning, and power strategy.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Business Ethics 
   
   
    This module explores business-society relations through the theories and practices of business ethics and social responsibility (BE&SR). The first part of the module will address the concept of business ethics, a discussion of citizenship theory and the challenges of globalisation and sustainability. The second part of the module will address the issues, impacts of business on individual stakeholder groups and analyse BE and SR in relation to each group. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and four one-hour seminars to cover material for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    International Business 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to key international business concepts. You will study topics such as the environment, theory of multinational enterprises, entry strategies, international leadership and operating in international markets.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Sustainable Business Challenge 
   
   
    This module aims to integrate your learning from across management topics by exposing you to real-world challenges such as sustainability, responsibility, economic growth, competition, and megatrends. You will be required to prioritise responses to issues and balance economic, social, environmental and reputational value by simulating the challenges of running a large business and meeting the demands of stakeholders. Teams of students will play the role of the senior management team of a large UK corporation, and must deliver strategic change and react to tactical issues that unfold during the module. Each group will deliver responses to a series of unfolding challenges from customers, media, regulators, and other prominent stakeholders.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional   
  
    Marketing and Society 
   
   
    This module will give you an overview of marketing and its impact on society. It will consider marketing and socially-responsible consumption, marketing and public policy issues in advertising, promotion, pricing and distribution, marketing and consumer protection policy, and consumer response to product information and disclosure.  You will have 11 one-hour lectures and two two-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Purchasing Strategies and Techniques 
   
  
     This module will introduce you to purchasing, its importance, role and impact in organizations. You will study the stages of a typical purchasing process and introduction to various tools buyers use and will consider areas such as strategic sourcing decisions and approaches, the Internal organisation of the purchasing function such as centralisation vs decentralisation, supplier evaluation and selection issues, total cost of ownership and quotation analysis. You will also cover portfolio and segmentation approaches to supplier management and how incentives and behavioural issues affect the managing of suppliers.  
   You will have 11 two-hour lectures and two one-hour seminars. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Behavioural Economics and Finance 
   
   
    In this module, you will gain an understanding of methods, results and models of behavioural economics and behavioural finance. We will talk about experiments and their importance in several fields. Within this context we will cover topic such as: how to design an experiment, asset markets, labour markets, social dilemmas, bargaining, contests, behavioural finance, market structure and risk. You will learn how to design your own experiment and how to interpret empirical results.  You will have 11 one-hour lectures and three one-hour tutorials.  
   
                       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing Services 
   
   
    This module is designed to develop an understanding of the special context and techniques of the marketing of services. The advanced economies of the world are now dominated by services, and virtually all companies view service as critical to establishing and retaining competitive advantage regardless of whether they market physical products, which all have a service element, or pure services. This module explores frameworks for understanding the nature and characteristics of services and the effective marketing of them.  You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Technology Entrepreneurship in Practice 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the importance of, and the processes involved in, the commercialisation of science and technology. The content of the course is highly relevant in the current climate where Government is placing much evidence on the wealth creation process. 
     You will have 11 90 minute lectures plus two one-hour tutorials to cover material in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Exploring Perspectives in Entrepreneurship 
   
   
    The module aims to develop an understanding of entrepreneurs and the firms they create and manage. It is designed to examine the nature and role of smaller enterprises, set the context for entrepreneurship and consider characteristics, attributes and resources of entrepreneurs. 
     You will have 11 one-hour lectures and three one-hour seminars to cover material for this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Inter Faculty Mandarin Chinese 3a
    
   
   
    This module develops the speaking and productive skills of language learning to enable you to function effectively at an intermediate level. The module stresses the productive skills, particularly spoken and written ones. You will have a two-hour seminar and one-hour practical each week in the target language to study for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Inter Faculty Mandarin 4b
    
   
   
    This module develops the four skills of reading, listening, speaking and writing to enable students to gather and process information accurately and quickly through discussion, from radio and TV and from written sources.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Globalization and Innovation in China
    
   
   
    Through a two-hour weekly lecture, this module is designed to analyse and assess the momentous changes taking place in China’s technology and innovation landscape from the perspective of globalization. After identifying the impacts of globalization on innovation in China, the module will concentrate on the vast transformations that have occurred since 1978 in China’s national innovation system. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Chinese Business and Society
    
   
   
    Introducing you to the economic, social, cultural and institutional settings in which businesses operate in China, possible topics to be covered include: Chinese firms, business groups and internationalisation, business culture, management and business practice, consumption and regional development. You will have a weekly two hour lecture to cover material for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Media and Communications in Globalising China
    
   
   
    Media systems are critically important in any modern political system, and this module leads you directly to the heart of understanding how the media relates to contemporary society and politics in the People’s Republic of China. It introduces you to the unprecedented transformation in contemporary Chinese media and communication in the context of economic reforms, development of new media technologies and globalisation through a two-hour weekly lecture.