Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Organisational Behaviour 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the basic ideas of organisational behaviour. The content will encourage you to develop an understanding of managing and developing people within business organisations. The module will draw its primary material from the major theorists and theories of both organisational psychology and organisational behaviour. The module will also develop links with other aspects of the business school curriculum such as general management and international business.  You will have 11 two-hour lectures and a one hour tutorial across the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Entrepreneurship and Business
    
   
   
    This module presents a formal analysis of entrepreneurship in theory and practice leading on to a consideration of creativity and business concept generation.  You’ll have 11 two-hour lectures with the module concluding with the practical application of these theories and concepts in a business planning and business concept presentation. 
     You will have 11 two-hour lectures with the module concluding with the practical application of these theories and concepts in a business planning and business concept presentation.   
   
  
      
   
  
    The French Language: I
    
   
   
    You’ll develop your understanding of the French language including grammar, written expression, aural and oral skills. 3 hours per week will be spent in lectures, workshops, and oral classes with a native speaker studying for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Analysis for Business
    
   
   
    This module provides a grounding in practical aspects of quantitative analysis with an emphasis on understanding and analysis of data. You will learn to apply statistical techniques to formulate and solve quantitative business problems as well as develop skills in the use of spreadsheets for statistical analysis and in interpreting statistical results. A group project forms part of the assessment allowing you to improve your team working and management skills. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures, five one-hour example classes and three one-hour computer labs.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Consumers and Markets 
   
   
    This module will cover the ways in which marketing and consumption drive business and shape society. It will provide an historical perspective, consider marketing professions and leadership within organisational contexts, and examine contemporary environments for marketing and consumption with particular attention to globalisation, innovation (including the transformative force of new technologies), and ethical and sustainability issues.  You will have 11 two-hour lectures and two one-hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Work and Society 
   
   
    This module explores the nature of work and society. The module will look at the development of our understanding of work and society. The development of the industrial and the post-industrial society will be explored and its impact on the nature of work, organisation and management. There will be a historical and critical review of the schools of thought and key writers. Examples of research into individual and group experiences of work, organisation and management will be discussed. 
     You will have 22 one-hour lectures and one two-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Business Economics 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the microeconomic theory of the market and the firm. Topics covered include: Market Demand; Supply and Equilibrium; Firm Production and Costs; Market Structure; Perfect Competition; Monopolistic Competition; Oligopoly; Monopoly; Consumer Theory and Market Failure.  You will have 10 two-hour lectures and four one-hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Managing Operations in the Digital Enterprise 
   
   
    In this module, you will study the Digital Enterprise, which will provide an integrated overview of Operations Management and Information Systems; key technology trends such as cloud and mobile computing; manufacturing systems design and management including lean thinking and  business process re-engineering; service operations design and management, including operations planning and control; supply chain design and management; Customer Relationship Management; Business Intelligence and analytics.  You will have 11 90 minute lectures, four one-hour seminars and five computer laboratory sessions.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Introduction to French and Francophone Studies 
   
   
    This module will provide an introduction to the range of topics and study skills you will need and further develop in the course of your study of French and Francophone Studies. It will cover the main fields of the discipline, including linguistics, politics, history, thought, French and Francophone literature, media, visual culture and cinema. These topics will be covered in 4 thematic units over the course of the year and the material studied ranges from different types of texts to images and film. Dedicated research skills sessions will address core study skills, such as reading skills, awareness of register, close reading, essay writing, commentary writing, bibliographical and referencing skills and visual analysis.   
   
  
      
   
   Optional  
  
    New Venture Creation 
   
   
    New Venture Creation will engage you in the more practical elements of innovation and enterprise activity, in terms of creating new businesses and entrepreneurship within the corporate environment. You’ll become prepared for enterprise activity across a variety of contexts.  You’ll have 11 two-hour seminars, seven hours lecture-based learning and four hours of mentored group work/practical enterprise activity.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Insurance in a Risky World 
   
   
    This module provides you with an introduction to the demand for and supply of insurance. The module examines how insurance markets operate to satisfy commercial and individual customers' demand for protection against risk, and would usually include topics such as private and social insurance, the historical development of insurance, the supply of insurance, Lloyd's and the London Insurance Market, how insurance is distributed to consumers, the role of insurance in the economy, international aspects of insurance and insurance and catastrophes.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary France: Economy and Society
    
   
   
    You’ll learn about the French economy, social class, gender and women's rights, spending around two-hours per week in lectures and workshops.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Language and its Uses
    
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to the basics of linguistics and applied linguistics, exploring the aspects necessary for an in-depth understanding of the French language including phonetics, vocabulary, register and syntax. You’ll aim to develop your ability to analyse and use the French language, as well as increase your awareness of linguistic variation.  You will have a  two-hour lecture once per week.  
      
   
  
      
   
  
    France: histoire et mythologies
    
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to French history from  the late Middle Ages, studying a series of historical figures, their lives and times and considering how their 'stories' are written and woven into the fabric of 'le roman de la nation'. The module particularly focuses on visual culture and representation. You will have around two hours a week in lectures and workshops for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Two Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Contemporary Economic Policy
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to the nature and scope of the macroeconomic policy agenda, and develops the analytical frameworks necessary for the evaluation of policy instruments. The module enables you to understand the economic arguments that underlie different views and to evaluate relevant arguments. You will have 10 two-hour lectures and three one-hour tutorials to study for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    The French Language
    
   
   
    Building upon the language module studied in Year 1, you’ll further develop your skills in reading, listening, speaking, creative writing and translation. You will spend two hours per week in workshops and in oral classes with a native speaker for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Human Resource Management 
   
   
    This module introduces the basic concepts of Human Resource Management (HRM), puts these concepts in broader perspective and subjects them to critical analysis. Areas covered will include HRM models, Recruitment and selection, Appraisal and pay, Training, Job design, Work-life balance and HRM and performance. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing Management 
   
   
    This module focuses on the management of marketing with reference to the ways in which organisations compete with different product-market offers. Particular attention is paid to the processes involved in the development of a marketing strategy and to the ways in which such strategies evolve and are managed.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Technology and Organisation 
   
   
   This module will examine a number of technologies, including cloud computing, 3D printing, nanotechnology, genetic modification, synthetic biology, artificial intelligence, robotics, genetic medicine and bioprinting, in the context of wider sustainability issues. You will also explore the broader themes of convergence, technological determinism, transhumanism and the Singularity. You will have 11 90 minute lectures plus two one-hour seminars, one ten-minute video and seven podcasts. 
    
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Strategic Management: Content and Analysis 
   
   
   This module examines the different approaches to - and techniques of - strategic management including analysis of the external and internal environments, the nature of competitive advantage and the development of the firm.  
   You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars. 
    
      
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Introduction to Business Operations 
   
  
    This module will introduce you to the scope and importance of operations management in both service and manufacturing businesses. The content of the module will be explored using a variety of management games and includes how IT and knowledge management is used to support operations, strategies for success in manufacturing operations, planning and forecasting, infrastructure development, how to gain competitive advantage through the effective management of the supply chain, the virtual enterprise, and achieving, managing and measuring quality. 
   You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Innovation 
   
   
    In this module, you will cover topics including: innovation in the history of economic thought, basic concepts in the economics of innovation, Intellectual property, economics of networks, standards and dominant designs, the entrepreneur, innovation, demand and consumption, clusters, innovation and the division of labour, innovation, competitiveness and trade, policy for innovation. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour tutorials.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Finance 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to basic corporate and personal finance concepts, including the time value of money, financial markets, shares and bonds, financial risk and return, raising money, and the elements of investment.  You will 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour workshops.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Corporate Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management
    
   
   
    This module develops an understanding of corporate entrepreneurship (CE) and an appreciation of how larger firms can be designed to be more entrepreneurial, flexible and innovative. You’ll have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    International Firms
    
   
   
    In this you’ll module examine the international business environment, in particular, the impact of international firms on the economy, the determinants of Foreign Direct Investment and their significance on regional and global economic integration. There is an emphasis on cultural and organisational aspects of international business and their impact on Corporate Social Responsibility, as well as differences in corporate governance across economic areas. The course structure is based on 3 sections focusing mainly on the activities of MNEs, firm organisation and performance, and the impact of international firms on the economy. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    French Cinema - The New Wave
    
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to teaching in film analysis and consider a particular period of French cinema through a detailed study of the New Wave. You will spend between two to three hours a week in lectures and seminars for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary French Culture in a Global Context
    
   
   
    This module explores recent attempts to defend and redefine French identity as a means of negotiating ways of living in an era of increasing globalisation and changing social structures. You will have one weekly two-hour lecture and one fortnightly one-hour seminar to study for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Francophone Africa: Exploring Contemporary Issues through Culture
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll be given an overview of the history of French language in Africa and introduced to the range of the varieties of French spoken there today. You’ll explore a range of political and social issues relevant to contemporary sub-Saharan Francophone Africa through literature, film and popular culture. You will have around two hours a week in lectures and seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Women and the French State
    
   
   
    Examining the changing role of women in France, you’ll focus on issues of family, motherhood and work, whilst also considering the role played by women in French politics, as voters and as politicians. Around two hours per week will be spent in lectures and seminars if you study this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
  Spent in France or a French-speaking country, either studying or on an industrial placement. For more information, see the Department of French and Francophone Studies' Study Abroad page.   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Four Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Contemporary Developments in Human Resource Management 
   
   
    This module examines a number of advanced topics in the area of Human Resource Management and you will cover topics including employment regulation; equality and diversity; voice and participation.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Strategic Management: Process and Practice 
   
   
    This module examines the managerial and organisational factors that influence the formation and subsequent realisation of strategy. The module enables you to develop skills in the analysis of strategic processes, with particular reference to the role of leadership, change, learning, and power strategy.  
   
  
      
   
  
    International Business 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to key international business concepts. You will study topics such as the environment, theory of multinational enterprises, entry strategies, international leadership and operating in international markets.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Sustainable Business Challenge 
   
   
    This module aims to integrate your learning from across management topics by exposing you to real-world challenges such as sustainability, responsibility, economic growth, competition, and megatrends. You will be required to prioritise responses to issues and balance economic, social, environmental and reputational value by simulating the challenges of running a large business and meeting the demands of stakeholders. Teams of students will play the role of the senior management team of a large UK corporation, and must deliver strategic change and react to tactical issues that unfold during the module. Each group will deliver responses to a series of unfolding challenges from customers, media, regulators, and other prominent stakeholders.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Optional  
  
    Technology Entrepreneurship in Practice 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the importance of, and the processes involved in, the commercialisation of science and technology. The content of the course is highly relevant in the current climate where Government is placing much evidence on the wealth creation process. You will have 11 90 minute lectures plus two one-hour tutorials to cover material in this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Exploring Perspectives in Entrepreneurship
    
   
   
    The module aims to develop an understanding of entrepreneurs and the firms they create and manage. It is designed to examine the nature and role of smaller enterprises, set the context for entrepreneurship and consider characteristics, attributes and resources of entrepreneurs. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and three one-hour seminars to cover material for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing and Society 
   
   
    This module will give you an overview of marketing and its impact on society. It will consider marketing and socially-responsible consumption, marketing and public policy issues in advertising, promotion, pricing and distribution, marketing and consumer protection policy, and consumer response to product information and disclosure. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and two two-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Purchasing Strategies and Techniques 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to purchasing, its importance, role and impact in organizations. You will study the stages of a typical purchasing process and introduction to various tools buyers use and will consider areas such as strategic sourcing decisions and approaches, the Internal organisation of the purchasing function such as centralisation vs decentralisation, supplier evaluation and selection issues, total cost of ownership and quotation analysis. You will also cover portfolio and segmentation approaches to supplier management and how incentives and behavioural issues affect the managing of suppliers.  You will have 11 two-hour lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Behavioural Economics and Finance 
   
   
    In this module, you will gain an understanding of methods, results and models of behavioural economics and behavioural finance. We will talk about experiments and their importance in several fields. Within this context we will cover topic such as: how to design an experiment, asset markets, labour markets, social dilemmas, bargaining, contests, behavioural finance, market structure and risk. You will learn how to design your own experiment and how to interpret empirical results. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and three one-hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing Services 
   
   
    This module is designed to develop an understanding of the special context and techniques of the marketing of services. The advanced economies of the world are now dominated by services, and virtually all companies view service as critical to establishing and retaining competitive advantage regardless of whether they market physical products, which all have a service element, or pure services. This module explores frameworks for understanding the nature and characteristics of services and the effective marketing of them. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Language and Social Interaction
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll undertake a detailed study of spoken language as a fundamental resource for human action and social organisation. Examination of both ordinary conversation and institutional discourse will enable you to explore the ways in which actions are performed, identities constructed and context achieved through talk. You will have a two-hour lecture each week for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Citizenship, Ethnicity and National Identity in Post-war France
    
   
   
    You’ll examine the range of social, political and philosophical questions raised by mass immigration to France in the post-war period. These questions will be tackled through historical analysis of patterns of migration and changing immigration policies, as well as through the study of relevant films, novels and theoretical texts. You will spend two- hours each week in lectures and seminars.