Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
  Typical Year One Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Business Economics 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the microeconomic theory of the market and the firm. Topics covered include: Market Demand; Supply and Equilibrium; Firm Production and Costs; Market Structure; Perfect Competition; Monopolistic Competition; Oligopoly; Monopoly; Consumer Theory and Market Failure.  You will have 10 two hour lectures and four one hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Consumers and Markets 
   
  
    This module will cover the ways in which marketing and consumption drive business and shape society. It will provide an historical perspective, consider marketing professions and leadership within organisational contexts, and examine contemporary environments for marketing and consumption with particular attention to globalisation, innovation (including the transformative force of new technologies), and ethical and sustainability issues.  
   You will have 11 two-hour lectures and two one-hour tutorials.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Organisational Behaviour 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the basic ideas of organisational behaviour. The content will encourage you to develop an understanding of managing and developing people within business organisations. The module will draw its primary material from the major theorists and theories of both organisational psychology and organisational behaviour. The module will also develop links with other aspects of the business school curriculum such as general management and international business. You will have 11 two-hour lectures and a one hour tutorial across the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Managing Operations in the Digital Enterprise 
   
   
    In this module, you will study the Digital Enterprise, which will provide an integrated overview of Operations Management and Information Systems; key technology trends such as cloud and mobile computing; manufacturing systems design and management including lean thinking and  business process re-engineering; service operations design and management, including operations planning and control; supply chain design and management; Customer Relationship Management; Business Intelligence and analytics.  You will have 11 90 minute lectures, four one-hour seminars and five computer laboratory sessions.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Work and Society 
   
   
    This module explores the nature of work and society. The module will look at the development of our understanding of work and society. The development of the industrial and the post-industrial society will be explored and its impact on the nature of work, organisation and management. There will be a historical and critical review of the schools of thought and key writers. Examples of research into individual and group experiences of work, organisation and management will be discussed.  You will have 22 one-hour lectures and one two-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Analysis for Business
    
   
   
    This module provides a grounding in practical aspects of quantitative analysis with an emphasis on understanding and analysis of data. You will learn to apply statistical techniques to formulate and solve quantitative business problems as well as develop skills in the use of spreadsheets for statistical analysis and in interpreting statistical results. A group project forms part of the assessment allowing you to improve your team working and management skills. You will have 10 two-hour lectures, 5 one-hour example classes and 3 one-hour computer labs.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Entrepreneurship and Business
    
   
   
    This module presents a formal analysis of entrepreneurship in theory and practice leading on to a consideration of creativity and business concept generation. You will have 11 two-hour lectures with the module concluding with the practical application of these theories and concepts in a business planning and business concept presentation.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Spanish I
    
   
   
    This module will combine revision of grammar with exposure to a variety of types and registers of written and spoken Spanish, focusing on appropriate thematic areas. It will consolidate and build on basic written, aural and oral language skill. You will spend three hours per week in lectures and seminars.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Spain and Portugal in the Twentieth Century
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll study the evolution of Spanish and Portuguese history, politics and culture from 1898 to the present day. You’ll be encouraged to draw links between the Portuguese and Spanish experiences, and place both countries’ experience of the twentieth century within the broader context of European and wider global history in this period. Particular emphasis will be placed upon the development of both countries from a (perceived) position of ‘difference’ and ‘backwardness’ to relatively prosperous, economically developed and culturally diverse members of the European Union. You will spend around four hours in lectures each week.
      
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Managing Tourism and the Environment: Conflict or Consensus? 
   
  
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Insurance in a Risky World 
   
   
    This module examines how insurance markets operate to satisfy commercial and individual customers' demand for protection against risk, and would usually include some of the following topics: introduction to insurance, private and social insurance, the historical development of insurance, why buy property/liability insurance?, why buy life, health and pensions insurance?, how is insurance distributed to consumers?,  international aspects of insurance and insurance and catastrophes. You will study this over 10 two-hour lectures and 2 one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    New Venture Creation
    
   
   
    New Venture Creation will engage you in the more practical elements of innovation and enterprise activity, in terms of creating new businesses and entrepreneurship within the corporate environment. You’ll become prepared for enterprise activity across a variety of contexts.  You will have 11 two-hour seminars, seven hours lecture-based learning and four hours of mentored group work/practical enterprise activity.
      
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Two Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Contemporary Economic Policy
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to the nature and scope of the macroeconomic policy agenda, and develops the analytical frameworks necessary for the evaluation of policy instruments. The module enables you to understand the economic arguments that underlie different views and to evaluate relevant arguments. You’ll have 10 two-hour lectures and three one-hour tutorials to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Human Resource Management 
   
   
    This module introduces the basic concepts of Human Resource Management (HRM), puts these concepts in broader perspective and subjects them to critical analysis. Areas covered will include HRM models, Recruitment and selection, Appraisal and pay, Training, Job design, Work-life balance and HRM and performance. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing Management 
   
   
    This module focuses on the management of marketing with reference to the ways in which organisations compete with different product-market offers.  Particular attention is paid to the processes involved in the development of a marketing strategy and to the ways in which such strategies evolve and are managed.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Strategic Management: Content and Analysis 
   
   
    This module examines the different approaches to - and techniques of - strategic management including analysis of the external and internal environments, the nature of competitive advantage and the development of the firm.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Technology and Organisation 
   
   
    This module will examine a number of technologies, including cloud computing, 3D printing, nanotechnology, genetic modification, synthetic biology, artificial intelligence, robotics, genetic medicine and bioprinting, in the context of wider sustainability issues. You will also explore the broader themes of convergence, technological determinism, transhumanism and the Singularity. You will have 11 90 minute lectures plus 2 one-hour seminars, one 10 minute video and seven podcasts.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Spanish II
    
   
   
    This module will build on grammatical knowledge and communication skills developed in “Lengua Espanola I”. Written classes will concentrate on developing essay writing skills in Spanish using a range of Spanish texts as stimuli. Special attention will be given to developing complex sentence structures and rhetorical devices. Laboratory classes will use a range of contemporary audio-visual materials from Spanish and Latin-American sources to develop aural comprehension and conversational ability in Spanish. There will be one written and one laboratory class per week. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Metropolis and Empire: Spain, Portugal and the Americas 1492 to Independence
    
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to the broad patterns of historical development of Spain and Portugal and of their emerging and evolving American colonies, over the three centuries of the imperial experience. You’ll focus mostly on the interconnections between metropolis and colonies in each case, but also on the discrete experiences of Spain, Portugal and of the major colonial centres, thus providing an understanding of the background to modern Spain, Portugal and Latin America. You will have a weekly one-hour lecture and one-hour seminar to study for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Corporate Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management
    
   
   
    This module develops an understanding of corporate entrepreneurship (CE) and an appreciation of how larger firms can be designed to be more entrepreneurial, flexible and innovative. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Organisation 
    
   
   
    In this module, you’ll study topics such as: organisational architecture, decision rights, reward systems, Individual performance evaluation, tournament theory, shareholder activism, CEO performance and turnover. You’ll study this through 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Business Operations 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the scope and importance of operations management in both service and manufacturing businesses. The content of the module will be explored using a variety of management games and includes how IT and knowledge management is used to support operations, strategies for success in manufacturing operations, planning and forecasting, infrastructure development, how to gain competitive advantage through the effective management of the supply chain, the virtual enterprise, and achieving, managing and measuring quality. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Economics of Innovation 
   
   
    In this module, you will cover topics including: innovation in the history of economic thought, basic concepts in the economics of innovation, Intellectual property, economics of networks, standards and dominant designs, the entrepreneur, innovation, demand and consumption, clusters, innovation and the division of labour, innovation, competitiveness and trade, policy for innovation. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour tutorials.   
   
  
      
   
  
    International Firms 
   
   
    In this module, you will examine the international business environment; in particular the impact of international firms on the economy, the determinants of Foreign Direct Investment and their significance on regional and global economic integration. Attention is paid to cultural and organisational aspects of international business and their impact on Corporate Social Responsibility, as well as differences in corporate governance across economic areas. The structure of the module is based on three sections focusing mainly on the activities of MNEs, firm organisation and performance, and the impact of international firms on the economy. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Finance 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to basic corporate and personal finance concepts, including the time value of money, financial markets, shares and bonds, financial risk and return, raising money, and the elements of investment. You will 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour workshops.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Year three is spent in Spain or a Spanish speaking country.  
   Please see the Department of Spanish, Portuguese and Latin American Studies year abroad page.  
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Four Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Contemporary Developments in Human Resource Management 
   
   
    This module examines a number of advanced topics in the area of Human Resource Management and you will cover topics including employment regulation; equality and diversity; voice and participation.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Strategic Management: Process and Practice 
   
   
    This module examines the managerial and organisational factors that influence the formation and subsequent realisation of strategy. The module enables you to develop skills in the analysis of strategic processes, with particular reference to the role of leadership, change, learning, and power strategy.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Lengua Espa&ntilde;ola III
    
   
   
    This is a module for all students of Spanish language, and will consist of 1  hour per week of oral work and one of writing skills. Recognising that significant progress will have been made in colloquial and informal language skills during the Year Abroad, this module intends to introduce you to a more formal and sophisticated register of spoken and written Spanish using print, off-air and internet sources.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Business Ethics 
   
   
    This module explores business-society relations through the theories and practices of business ethics and social responsibility (BE&SR). The first part of the module will address the concept of business ethics, a discussion of citizenship theory and the challenges of globalisation and sustainability. The second part of the module will address the issues, impacts of business on individual stakeholder groups and analyse BE and SR in relation to each group. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and four one-hour seminars to cover material for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    International Business 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to key international business concepts. You will study topics such as the environment, theory of multinational enterprises, entry strategies, international leadership and operating in international markets.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Sustainable Business Challenge 
   
   
    This module aims to integrate your learning from across management topics by exposing you to real-world challenges such as sustainability, responsibility, economic growth, competition, and megatrends. You will be required to prioritise responses to issues and balance economic, social, environmental and reputational value by simulating the challenges of running a large business and meeting the demands of stakeholders. Teams of students will play the role of the senior management team of a large UK corporation, and must deliver strategic change and react to tactical issues that unfold during the module. Each group will deliver responses to a series of unfolding challenges from customers, media, regulators, and other prominent stakeholders.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Technology Entrepreneurship in Practice 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the importance of, and the processes involved in, the commercialisation of science and technology. The content of the course is highly relevant in the current climate where Government is placing much evidence on the wealth creation process. You will have 11 90 minute lectures plus two one-hour tutorials to cover material in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing and Society 
   
   
    This module will give you an overview of marketing and its impact on society. It will consider marketing and socially-responsible consumption, marketing and public policy issues in advertising, promotion, pricing and distribution, marketing and consumer protection policy, and consumer response to product information and disclosure. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and two two-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Purchasing Strategies and Techniques 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to purchasing, its importance, role and impact in organizations. You will study the stages of a typical purchasing process and introduction to various tools buyers use and will consider areas such as strategic sourcing decisions and approaches, the Internal organisation of the purchasing function such as centralisation vs decentralisation, supplier evaluation and selection issues, total cost of ownership and quotation analysis. You will also cover portfolio and segmentation approaches to supplier management and how incentives and behavioural issues affect the managing of suppliers. You will have 11 two-hour lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Behavioural Economics and Finance 
   
   
    In this module, you will gain an understanding of methods, results and models of behavioural economics and behavioural finance. We will talk about experiments and their importance in several fields. Within this context we will cover topic such as: how to design an experiment, asset markets, labour markets, social dilemmas, bargaining, contests, behavioural finance, market structure and risk. You will learn how to design your own experiment and how to interpret empirical results. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and three one-hour tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Marketing Services 
   
   
    This module is designed to develop an understanding of the special context and techniques of the marketing of services. The advanced economies of the world are now dominated by services, and virtually all companies view service as critical to establishing and retaining competitive advantage regardless of whether they market physical products, which all have a service element, or pure services. This module explores frameworks for understanding the nature and characteristics of services and the effective marketing of them. You will have 11 90 minute lectures and two one-hour seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Exploring Perspectives in Entrepreneurship 
    
   
   
    The module aims to develop an understanding of entrepreneurs and the firms they create and manage. It is designed to examine the nature and role of smaller enterprises, set the context for entrepreneurship and consider characteristics, attributes and resources of entrepreneurs. You will have 11 one-hour lectures and three one-hour seminars to cover material for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Creative Writing in Spanish
    
   
   
    This module aims to develop and improve your writing skills in Spanish by providing you with practice in creative writing in the target language supported by the study of creative features of relevant contemporary fiction in Spanish. You will work in prose forms such as short stories, flash fiction and autobiography. You will spend around three hours per week in seminars studying for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Civil War and Memory Wars in Contemporary Spain
    
   
   
    This module will give you an understanding of the origins of the Spanish Civil War, the character of the war itself, the factors which determined its outcome, and the implications of that outcome for Spanish history since 1939. The module will also consider the legacy of this period of history in contemporary Spanish politics and culture. You will have 2 two-hour seminars each week to study for this module. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Politics and Literature in Contemporary 'Hispanic' Writing
    
   
   
    This module aims to develop your knowledge and understanding of the interfaces between literature and politics through the study of the way in which crucial social and political issues are articulated in contemporary Spanish cultural artefacts. You will have a weekly two-hour seminar to cover material in this module.