Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Infection and Defence
    
   
   
    This module provides an overview of medical microbiology and immunology to give an understanding of how the body defends itself against pathogens. You’ll study the pathogenic mechanisms of infectious disease and will learn how the immune system responds to foreign agents and pathogenic organisms. Exploring the epidemiology, aetiology and the principles of treatment of selected systemic infections will help to place the subject matter in a medical context which is further consolidated by the basic theory underlying immunisation and anti-microbial strategies. You’ll have 45 hours contact time for this module delivered through lectures and lab-based practical sessions.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Body Structure, Body Function 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the study of organ systems, including an overview of human anatomy, physiology and biochemistry, in the context of the biomedical sciences. A strong emphasis is placed on the acquisition of transferable skills through early laboratory experience and an introduction to the study of science at undergraduate level. There will be 26 hours contact time for this module comprising lab work, anatomy classes (using human cadavers in our dedicated anatomy suite), tutorials and workshops.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Population Health 
   
   
    This year-long module will introduce you to the study of population health, medical statistics, epidemiology, and the social determinants of health within modern populations. In addition to this, the psychology of behaviour change is also considered, and a strong emphasis is placed on research skills, statistics, and the application of key knowledge. You’ll complete a written review of literature in an area of your choice and will give an oral presentation at a ‘mini conference’. There will be a combination of lectures and practical classes, as well as some time spent in small groups. The total duration of scheduled activities will be around 36 hours.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Movement 
   
   
    In this module you’ll get an introduction to the study of musculoskeletal and nervous systems in the context of medical physiology and neuroscience. The module will cover the normal anatomy, physiology, and cell biology of skin and connective tissue, types of muscle and bone, before moving on to discuss joint structure, biomechanics, the nervous system, and the control of locomotion. There is 30 hours contact time for this module through a mix of lectures, lab work, anatomy workshops, and group tutorials.             
   
  
      
   
  
    Supply and Demand 1 
   
   
    The aim of the module is to introduce you to the fundamental biomedical disciplines of haematology and biochemistry. The haematological content will provide a basis for understanding aspects related to diseases affecting blood. Basic knowledge regarding nutrition, metabolism, and digestion will allow broad understanding of the relationship between diet, production of energy and health, and appreciation of factors affecting metabolic balance and whole body homeostasis. You’ll have lectures, tutorials and lab-based practical sessions totalling 43 hours for this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Neuroscience
    
   
   
   This module aims to further develop your understanding of human neurobiology from modules taken in year one. The module provides an overview of the anatomy, physiology, molecular, and cognitive aspects of nervous system function. The pathology of nervous system disease and injury is taught alongside a wide range of practical neurodiagnostic techniques; both current and developing therapeutic approaches are considered. There are over 47 contact hours on this module, made up of lab work and taught classes, including some problem-based learning exercises. You will also share a large number of your lectures  and problem-based learning sessions with our medical students (this is especially useful if you are considering applying for Graduate Entry Medicine after your degree in Medical Physiology and Therapeutics). 
    
      
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Reproduction
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll examine the core concepts in human reproduction. The emphasis of the module will be on physiological and biomedical mechanisms that underpin both male and female reproductive function, including pregnancy and birth. You’ll also learn about factors contributing to infertility and the main pathophysiologal mechanisms implicated. Options available for treating infertility and the impact of the environment on reproductive outcomes will also be discussed. This module will consist of lectures and tutorials with a total of 35 hours contact time and scheduled PBL sessions.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Social Sciences and Ethics  
   
   
    In this module you’ll consider the impact of psychological, behavioural and social factors on health and health-related behaviour which will provide you with an awareness of the external factors influencing healthcare, policy and service provision in the UK. A range of issues related to health, illness and disability are explored to encourage an understanding of their implications for practice and professionalism in today’s healthcare service. The central ethical foundation of current medical practice is explored and clarified in terms of four basic principles. This module is delivered through 24 hours of contact time in a combination of lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Pharmacology and Therapeutics
    
   
   
   This compulsory module provides an overview of pharmacology (drug action) and therapeutics (the treatment of disease using drugs and other non-pharmacological methods) to help underpin study in other modules in years two and three. In addition, through seminars from clinical academics and case studies, you’ll learn about the principles of the therapeutic approach in a range of common diseases (e.g. diabetes, renal disease and cancer). Assessment of learning in the module includes use of an innovative ‘integrated therapeutics’ essay, in which you are able to demonstrate in-depth scientific understanding of the modern multi-pronged approach to treatment of disease. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Cardiovascular Disease 
   
   
    This module builds on fundamental knowledge of the cardiovascular system from the year 1 module ‘Supply and Demand 2’. It provides an overview of important diseases of the cardiovascular system, their diagnosis and the principles of treatment. An emphasis is placed on taking information from lectures, anatomy classes, clinical skills-based practicals and tutorials and applying it to clinical cases in an integrated way.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Diagnostic Histopathology and Imaging
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the preparation and interpretation of normal and diseased tissue using a range of microscopy techniques. These will include wax histology, preparation of frozen tissue samples, immunofluorescence and histochemical techniques. Interpretation of tissues in health and disease will build on the histology and microscopy sessions carried out as a longitudinal theme in year one. You will process, section and label tissue and cell samples using a range of techniques and will interpret material using case studies and interactive material. You’ll visit laboratories at the Derby/QMC trusts and will have an opportunity to visit the Advanced Microscopy Unit at the School of Life Sciences. There are 29 hours contact time for this module delivered in a mix of lectures, workshops and lab-based classes and visits.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Respiratory Disease 
    
   
   
   This module extends basic understanding of respiratory physiology. You will develop an understanding of the biomedical basis for a range of common respiratory diseases in the UK (eg occupational, chronic obstructive lung disease and lung cancer), and the means by which they are investigated and diagnosed. Principles of management will also be discussed. You will also develop a wide range of clinical skills for diagnosis, including: percussion and basic palpation of the chest wall and thorax, auscultation of the breath sounds, The core anatomy and physiology will be delivered alongside applied teaching which focuses on the acquisition of clinical diagnostic skills in practical classes. The module facilitates the development of group work and written communication skills and requires you to apply your knowledge to mock clinical cases and write a detailed case study report. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Cancer Biology
    
   
  
    This module will provide you with an overview of cancer, considering the concept of cancer, risk factors for cancer, molecular level changes that occur in cancer, cancer treatment and the prevention of cancer. The laboratory techniques currently used in the diagnosis of cancer in medical practice and in cancer research will be highlighted throughout. Multiple session practical classes that provide the opportunity to develop laboratory based skills used in the detection and diagnosis of cancer will be undertaken and you will analyse data and compare data to the current peer-reviewed knowledge base. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Research Project/Audit
    
   
   
   This unique module, comprising 50% of your final year of your, will fully immerse you in the research environment providing you with direct experience of contemporary research in the biomedical and clinical sciences and enables the development of the practical and organisational skills needed for a career in scientific or clinical research. You’ll undertake a project that reflects the research activities of the school by designing, planning and carrying out a research project under the guidance of an academic supervisor. The form of the research project will vary and can include laboratory-based work and/or clinical, patient-based studies. Contact time is self-driven from a minimum of two days/week to a full 35 hour working week. There are also opportunities for you to undertake your research project abroad.
                        
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Design, Research Methods and Statistics
    
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn specific methods for carrying out your own research in the medical and biomedical sciences. It will prepare you for research project work in a variety of settings covering topics such as literature searching, compiling bibliographies, advanced medical statistics, scientific writing, evidence-based health and clinical trial and design among others. You’ll have 121 hours of contact time via lectures and workshops.   
   
  
      
   
   
   Personal and Professional Development 
   
   
    This compulsory module has two main aims: to help you to develop ‘employability’ skills and skills for lifelong learning such as reflective practice. The module is delivered by academic staff in the School, with the help of advisers from the University’s Careers Service, external speakers and Nottingham alumni. Speakers come from a range of disciplines, including laboratory research, clinical research, physiological measurement commercial/government organisations as well as medical school graduates talking about their careers. By the end of the module, you will have learned about your strengths and weaknesses and reflected on these in a meaningful way, preparing you for life after graduation.  
   
  
      
   
    Special Study Modules   
  
    Clinical Cases in Endocrinology and Diabetes
    
   
   
    Using a case based approach, you’ll review the normal physiology and pathology of the major endocrine systems. You’ll use clinical cases to appreciate the importance of dynamic function testing in endocrine disorders and in diabetes mellitus as well as gain experience of the interpretation of laboratory results to aid the diagnosis of these disorders and aid in the long term monitoring of such patients. You’ll spend 10 hours in tutorial classes and problem based learning for the investigation of clinical cases.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cannabinoids and the Endocannabinoid System
    
   
   
    This module will address recent advances in cannabinoid pharmacology and the therapeutic potential of cannabis-based medicines including: cannabinoid pharmacology, the endocannabinoid system, central effects of cannabinoids, peripheral effects of cannabinoids, traditional and modern therapeutic uses of cannabinoids. You’ll have eight hours of contact time including self-directed study of current literature and student presentations of a nominated research paper.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Drug Development and Use in Children and Adults
    
   
   
    This module will introduce key aspects of pharmacology. The main component is directed to some of the considerations needed in the pharmaceutical care of children and adults. Content will include: introduction to pharmacology, drug licensing system and clinical trials, adverse drug reactions and the yellow card reporting system, pharmacokinetics in adults and children, issues with use of unlicensed and off label drugs and ethics of pharmaceutical research in children and adults. This module will consist of 12 hours of small group teaching plus independent self-directed study of current literature.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Lipid Signalling
    
   
   
    This module provides an insight into the complexity of lipid molecules and their cellular functions, and the numerous diseases that arise as a consequence of aberrant lipid processing and signalling, and how these diseases can be treated. A combination of lectures and practical content over 16 hours will provide you with a strong introduction to this emerging field of signalling and its relevance to the medical sciences.