Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Learning History 
   
   
    This module will provide you with the learning skills necessary to make the most of your studies in history. You will be introduced to different approaches in the study of history as well as to different understandings of the functions served by engagement with the past. The module aims to encourage more effective learning, bridge the transition from school or college to university, prepare you for more advanced work in the discipline, and enhance various skills. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Understanding the Past – Introduction to Archaeology 
   
   
    This module will provide you with an introduction to Archaeology as a discipline. It covers the development of the subject and examines methods for discovering, recovering and analysing archaeological remains. Archaeological prospection/survey, excavation, post-survey/excavation analysis, approaches to dating, materials analysis and an introduction to frameworks of social interpretation are all themes addressed within the module, which also introduces some of the key practical skills for archaeology. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures, seminars, practical classes, and computer workshops on average taking up about 2 hours per week across a full year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Forests to Farmers: Prehistoric Archaeology of Britain 
   
   
    This module provides an overview of the archaeology of the British Isles from the earliest traces of human activity until the Roman invasion of Britain. It will introduce students to key concepts in prehistoric archaeology through study of the major archaeological finds and sites of the period from henges to the hillforts of Wessex. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 4 hours per week across the autumn semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Rome to Revolution: Historical Archaeology of Britain 
   
   
    This module provides students with an overview of the archaeology of the British Isles from the Roman invasion until the industrial revolution. Using key sites and discoveries, students will be introduced to the challenges of understanding the archaeology of periods partially documented in textual sources. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 4 hours per week across the spring semester.  
   
  
      
   
     Optional  
  
    Introduction to the Medieval World, 500–1500 
   
   
    This module provides an introduction to medieval European history in the period 500–1500. It offers a fresh and stimulating approach to the major forces instrumental in the shaping of politics, society and culture in Europe. Through a series of thematically linked lectures and seminars, you will be introduced to key factors determining changes in the European experience over time, as well as important continuities linking the period as a whole. Amongst the topics to be considered are: political structures and organisation, social and economic life and cultural developments. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Reformation to Revolution: an introduction to early modern history: 1500–1789 
   
   
    This module introduces you to major issues in the social, political and cultural history of Europe in the early modern period by analysing demographic, religious, social and cultural changes that took place between 1500 and 1789. You will examine the tensions produced by warfare, religious conflict, the changing relationships between rulers, subjects and political elites, trends in socio-economic development and the discovery of the ‘New World’. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Roads to Modernity: an introduction to modern history, 1789–1945 
   
   
    In the first semester, the module provides a chronology of modern history from c.1789–1945 which concentrates principally on key political developments in European and global history such as the French Revolution, the expansion of the European empires and the two World Wars. The second semester will look more broadly at economic, social and cultural issues, such as industrialisation, urbanisation, changing artistic forms and ideological transformations in order to consider the nature of modernity. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
     Compulsory  
  
    The Contemporary World since 1945 
   
   
    This module surveys and analyses some of the main developments in world affairs since the end of the Second World War. This includes major international events, particularly the course and aftermath of the Cold War, as well as national and regional histories, especially in Europe, East Asia and the Middle East. The module also looks at key political and social movements. Attention is paid to political, economic and social forces. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Archaeological Research: theory and practice 
   
   
    This module is aimed at helping students to develop more advanced research skills and to discover the methods that are used in major archaeological research projects. In particular students will be introduced to the research methods that they will put into practice in their third year dissertation or independent project. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Introduction to the Archaeology of the Roman Empire 
   
   
    This module provides an overview of the archaeology of the Roman Empire, developing themes encountered in the first year Rome to Revolution module. It traces the development of the Roman world and examines the archaeology of the Empire’s provinces. Specific themes in this course include town, villas and the countryside, housing the army among other related topics. For this module you will have a combination of lecture and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Medieval World 
   
   
    This module considers the archaeology of Europe and the Mediterranean from the end of the Roman Empire to the high Middle Ages (from c. AD 400–1400). Key topics include: the formation of post-Roman societies; rural settlement; the emergence of central places and the development of towns; trade and exchange; and the introduction of Christianity and the role of the Church. The lectures and seminars, totalling around 2 hours per week, will explore integrated approaches to archaeological evidence incorporating landscapes, standing buildings, excavated sites and material culture.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Underwater Archaeology 
   
   
    This module provides you with a broad introduction to the current methods and practice of underwater Archaeology. The module focuses on themes such as lake dwellings, shipwrecks, submerged cities and sunken harbours. Case studies are used ranging in space from Scandinavia to Australia and in time from BC 1500 to the last century. Some of the issues tackled in this module include: Methods and techniques of underwater excavation, Problems of conservation and underwater material, Sunken harbours, cities and processes of submergences, and Lake dwelling and freshwater archaeology among others. For this module you will have 2 hours of lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Mediterranean Prehistory 
   
   
    This module examines the background to the rise and nature of the first civilisations of Europe; the Minoan and Cycladic cultures of the Early Bronze Age in the Aegean. It takes a long chronological perspective, and places particular emphasis on the ‘proto-urban’ cultures of the Early Bronze Age, the first rise of palatial civilisation on Crete, the development of Iron Age societies in Greece and Italy, and what we can learn about them through archaeology. For this module you will have a combination of lecture and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Heroes and Villains in Middle Britain 
   
   
    The module compares and contrasts key historical, legendary and fictional figures to examine the development of western medieval values and ideologies such as monasticism, chivalry and kingship. It explores how individuals shaped ideal types and how they themselves strove to match medieval archetypes. The binary oppositions between ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are explored through study of the ‘bad king’, and the creation of villains such as the Jew. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Crusades 
   
   
    This module addresses evidence for crusader motivation and experience through sources relating to crusading activity in Europe and the Middle East from the late eleventh century to the mid-13th century. It seeks to understand how crusaders saw themselves and their enemies, their experiences and activity on crusade and as settlers, and how this horrifying yet enduringly fascinating process has been interpreted historically. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Venetian Republic, 1450–1575 
   
   
    This module explores the nature of the Venetian Republic in the later 15th and 16th centuries. It examines the constitution, its administrative and judicial system, its imperial and military organisation, but will above all focus on the city and its inhabitants itself. The module will discuss the enormous cultural dynamism of the city (especially the visual arts from the Bellini to Tintoretto and Veronese), changing urban fabric, the role of ritual and ceremony, the position of the Church, and class and gender. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    De-industrialisation: A Social and Cultural History, 1970–1990 
   
   
    This module examines the social and cultural impact of economic change in three traditional industrial regions in the UK, Germany and the US in the 1970s and 1980s. It takes thematic approaches, exploring topics including: overlaps and differences between Contemporary History and the Social Sciences; change and decline in traditional industries such as coal, steel and shipbuilding; political responses to industrial change, with a particular focus on industrial conflict over closures, among others. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Soviet State and Society 
   
   
    This module examines political, social and economic transformations in the Soviet Union from the October Revolution of 1917 to Gorbachev’s attempted reforms and the collapse of the state in 1991. You will look at Russia both from the top down (state-building strategies; leadership and regime change; economic and social policy formulation and implementation) and from the bottom up (societal developments and the changing structures and practices of everyday life). You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Race, Rights and Propaganda: the superpowers, the Cold War, and the politics of racial identity, 1945–89 
   
   
    The Cold War was a conflict defined as much by intellectual and cultural struggle as by conventional military means, diplomacy, or realpolitik. Conceptions of race and identity were by no means immune from this, but heavily disputed and contested in the political environment of the Cold War. This module examines how the two superpowers dealt with issues of race and identity during the Cold War years, confronting questions and challenges from both within their own borders (and each other’s) and in several theatres of superpower conflict – including the Middle East, East Asia and post-colonial Africa. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
      
   You will also attend a non-assessed weekly lecture module throughout the year called ‘Doing History’. This builds on the first-year core module Learning History and aims to develop your awareness of the craft of the historian, developing essential skills to get the most out of your second-year options and enabling you to determine what sort of historian you are. It also operates as a bridge to your third and final year, permitting you to make informed decisions about your choice of Special Subject, third-year options, and dissertation.  
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
   
   Dissertation 
   
   
    This module involves the in-depth study of a historical subject from which you will create a 10,000 word dissertation. You will have regular meetings with your supervisor and a weekly one hour lecture to guide you through this task. Students who do not undertake a dissertation in archaeology will undertake a 5-6,000 word independent project.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Kings, Saints, and Monsters in England, 450–850 
   
   
    This module examines cultural and political changes in the southern half of the island of Britain between the fifth and ninth centuries, in particular the development of kingship and kingdoms as a form of political organisation, and the effects of the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity. You will spend three hours in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Italy at War, 1935–45 
   
   
    Spending three hours per week in seminars and tutorials, you will be given a framework to understand the experience of Italians (and to a lesser degree their enemies, allies, and collaborators) during the military conflicts in the long decade 1935–45, as well as knowledge of the background factors that shaped these experiences. As source material you will have the chance to explore diplomatic correspondence, personal memoirs, newspapers and magazines, newsreels, as well as examining the representation of the war in literature and cinema.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Samurai Revolution: Reinventing Japan, 1853–78 
   
   
    This module surveys the dramatic cultural encounter in the nineteenth century as the world of the samurai was confronted by Western expansion and the Age of Steam. It explores the forces at work in Japan’s rapid transformation from an ‘ancien r&eacute;gime’ under the rule of the Shogun into a ‘modern’ imperial power. Original documents examined in class draw on the growing range of Japanese primary sources available in English translation, together with the extensive works of Victorian diplomats, newspaper correspondents and other foreign residents in the treaty ports. You will have a three hour seminar each week to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Racial State to Reconstruction: women and gender relations in Germany, 1939–45  
   
   
    This module adopts a perspective of women's and gender history to explore the history of Germany in the period from the beginning of the National Socialist dictatorship up to the division of Germany into two post-war states in 1949. It will examine National Socialist discourses, policies and practices in relation to women and gender relations by drawing on records of public authorities and institutions concerned with educating and training the female population in line with Nazi precepts, mobilizing labour for the Nazi war economy, sustaining home front morale, and combating ‘threats to the race’. You will have a weekly three hour seminar to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Archaeology of Anglo-Saxon England 
   
   
    This module considers the archaeology of England from the end of the Roman occupation until the Norman conquest. You will focus on the question of the Romano-British survival and the impact of Romano-British culture on the Anglo-Saxon incomers, on the archaeology of the early state in England, on the development of town and rural settlement patterns, on the role of the church in society and on the Danish impact on England. For this module you will have a combination of lectures, seminars and field trips over the course of 11 weeks.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Archaeology of the Medieval City 
   
   
    The aim of this module is to provide you with a broad knowledge of the archaeological evidence for the development of cities and urban life in the later medieval period 1000–1500, with a focus on English towns and cities in their wider Europe context. The module will explore the integration of varied sources of archaeological evidence including urban landscapes, buildings and material culture, and particular emphasis placed on interdisciplinary approaches to urban economic and social life. For this module you will have a combination of lectures, seminars, workshops and a fieldtrip over the period of eleven weeks.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Rome and the Mediterranean 
   
   
    In this module you will examine the archaeological evidence for the Roman period in Italy and the Mediterranean from c. 300 BC to c. AD 550. The major social, cultural and economic changes of the region in this period will be discussed as well as in the context of wider historical and archaeological approaches to the Mediterranean. You’ll have an hour of lectures and an hour-long seminar for this module.