Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   
  Typical Year Zero (Foundation Year) Modules
   
   
  
  
  
    Cells and Tissues 
   
  
    This module considers the particulars of cell and tissue biology. You will explore a number of topics including: prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell structure and function, organelles, biological membranes, cell division, transport across membranes, and tissue types. For this module you will have a blended mix of taught classes, laboratory practicals, independent study exercises and e-learning, totalling around 30 hours of contact time in the Autumn semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Organic Chemistry 
   
  
    This module considers the particulars of organic chemistry. You will consider the role of carbon in living things. You will consider the structure of carbon compounds such as alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, arenes, alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, and carboxylic acids.  For this module you will have a combination of taught classes, laboratory practicals, completion of workbooks, e-learning and self-directed learning, totalling 21 hours in the Autumn semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Biological Molecules 
   
  
    This module is concerned with biological molecules. The content covered in this module includes: water, carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, protein, nucleic acids, vitamins, and minerals. For this module you will have a mix of taught classes, laboratory practicals, completion of workbooks, e-learning and self-directed learning totalling 30 hours in the Autumn semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Human Genetics 
   
  
    This module considers aspects of medical genetics. You will consider genetic variation, inheritance, mutation, cloning and gene therapy. For this module you’ll have a combination of taught classes, completion of workbooks and e-learning totalling 21 hours over the course of the Autumn semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Inorganic Chemistry 
   
  
    In this module you will consider the particulars in relation to inorganic chemistry. You will consider atomic structure, the periodic table and periodicity, acids, bases and salts, solutions and suspensions, chemical reactions, enthalpy of reactions and oxidation and reduction. For this module you will have a mix of taught classes, laboratory practicals, completion of workbooks, e-learning and self-directed learning, with contact time totalling 78 hours over the course of the year.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Study Skills 
   
   
   This module relates to the practical skills needed to help you with your studies and in your future career. This module will cover skills including: information gathering, recording information, data analysis, time management, effective scientific writing and laboratory reports, referencing, computer skills, and examination success. For this module you will have a mix of taught classes, workbooks, e-learning and self-directed learning, with contact time totalling 21 hours of contact time over the course of the year. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Health, Behaviour and Society 
   
  
    This module is related to the particulars of health, behaviour and society. The content covered in this module includes: health psychology, health promotion, and coping with illness. This module also considers lifestyle factors and their influence on health including exercise, diet, tobacco, alcohol and stress. For this module you will have a blended mix of taught classes, completion of workbooks, and self-directed learning totalling 21 hours of contact time over the course of the year. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemical Processes 
   
  
    This module is concerned with biochemical processes. For this module you will consider enzyme structure, enzyme function, DNA replication, protein synthesis, and cellular respiration. For this module you will have a combination of taught classes, laboratory practicals, completion of workbooks and e-learning, with a total contact time of 27 hours over the Spring semester. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Body Structure 
   
  
    This module is concerned with body structure. You will be introduced to anatomy, organs and organ systems including alimentary canal, blood vessels, brain and spinal cord, heart, kidney, liver, and lungs. You’ll also be taught about the peripheral nerves, reproductive organs, and the skeleton and muscles. For this module you will have a blended mix of taught classes, completion of workbooks, e-learning and self-directed learning, totalling 36 hours of contact time. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Body Processes 
   
  
    This module is concerned with body processes. You will cover topics including: absorption, filtration and reabsorption in the body, chemical digestion, gaseous exchange, immune response, muscle contraction, and nerve impulses. In this module you will have a combination of taught classes, laboratory practicals, completion of workbooks and e-learning, totalling around 26 hours of contact time over the Spring semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
   We offer a wide range of modules for each of the five years, together with optional modules for Year 2 and for the Year 3 Research Project.   
  Typical modules for years one to five of the A100 Medicine Course are listed here and click on the 'modules' tab.