Modules  
  This is a combined honours course, which means that you will study three subjects, equally weighted in the degree.  
  There are three combinations to choose from and there also a number of choices for language study.  
  You may study one or two languages on this degree. Only one language may be studied from beginners’ level. Languages options are French, German, Portuguese, Spanish or Russian, which are available at post-A level or beginners’ level, and Dutch, Serbian/Croatian, Slovene, which are available at beginners’ level.  
  Branch 1 – Modern history and two modern languages   
  You will study two 20-credit core history modules per year alongside your two core language modules. The rest of your choices can be made from a selection of optional modules related to your chosen languages.  
  Branch 2 – Politics and two modern languages.  
  You will study four 10-credit politics modules per year alongside your two core language modules. The rest of your choices can be made from a selection of optional modules related to your chosen languages.  
  Branch 3 -Modern history, politics and one modern language.  
  You will study four 10-credit politics modules and two 20-credit history modules per year alongside your core language module, and optional modules related to your chosen language.  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
  
    Nation, Myth, Identity: Introduction to Russian and Slavonic Studies 
   
   
    This module introduces students to the principal areas and topics of Russian and Slavonic Studies, including relevant historical contexts to study the linguistic, cultural and literary developments of the Slavonic world; methodological and conceptual issues of Russian and Slavonic Studies; and specific technical skills (e.g. transliteration of the Cyrillic alphabet, analytical skills, writing skills, oral presentation skills, referencing of Slavonic sources).  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to German Studies 
   
   
    This module will provide an introduction to the study of German. It will cover the main fields of German Studies (literature, culture, history, linguistics, media) as well as the study skills required for academic study (critical and analytic skills, reading skills, presentation skills, writing skills).  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to French and Francophone Studies 
   
   
    This module will provide an introduction to the range of topics and study skills students will need and further develop in the course of their degree study of French and Francophone Studies. It will cover the main fields of the discipline, including linguistics, politics, history, thought, French and Francophone literature, media, visual culture and cinema.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Learning History 
   
   
    This module concentrates upon student conceptions of the subject and their strategies as learners, in order to enable them more effectively to monitor and develop their skills and understanding.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Literature in Spanish 
   
   
    This is a core module, designed as a foundation for all other literary modules, in which students will read a series of key texts from the Peninsula and Spanish America. Its purpose is to impart an essential body of literary-historical and cultural knowledge relating to the main periods, genres and conventions of literature in Spanish from the Middle Ages to the modern period.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Understanding Global Politics 
   
   
    This module introduced global politics through the major theoretical, historical and empirical ways of seeing international relations. Different claims about, for example, human nature, power, war, peace, the state, society, law and politics are offered by thinkers who exercise a major influence on our contemporary understanding. These claims contribute to different approaches to politics in a global context.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Roads to Modernity: An Introduction to Modern History 1789-1945 
   
   
    In the first semester, the module provides a chronology of modern history from c.1789–1945 which concentrates principally on key political developments in European and global history such as the French Revolution, the expansion of the European empires and the two World Wars. The second semester will look more broadly at economic, social and cultural issues, such as industrialisation, urbanisation, changing artistic forms and ideological transformations in order to consider the nature of modernity. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Culture and Society of the Low Countries 
   
   
    This module will examine the development of the Netherlands and Belgium since the First World War. It is compulsory for students studying Dutch as part of their degree course and optional for students of German. You will study the period from 1945 to the present day; society in the Netherlands and Belgium; and aspects of Dutch and Flemish culture. You will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    History of the Low Countries 
   
   
   This module will introduce students to selected topics in the history of the Low Countries from the sixteenth century to the present day. It will focus on a number of key events and periods such as the fall of Antwerp in 1585, the Belgian Revolution of 1830, the Flemish Movement and the Second World War.  
   You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
     
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
  
    Contemporary France & Globalisation 
   
   
    This module looks at contemporary French society in the context of an increasingly globalised culture and economy. The module analyses recent attempts to defend, redefine and adapt key aspects of French economic and cultural life in order to negotiate ways of living in an era of globalisation. The material in the module focuses on key debates around globalisation: the national and the ‘local’ versus the global; constructions of Frenchness in opposition to America; the decline of rural France; the contemporary redefinition and possible continued significance of established French values and cultural practices; and the problems associated with maintaining a distinctively French social model in the face of globalisation.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Caribbean Francophone Writing 
   
   
    In this introduction to literature in French from the Caribbean, you’ll study texts by authors from Martinique and Guadeloupe, and will combine discussion of the contexts with critical analyses of the texts themselves. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and seminars if you study this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Civilization and Barbarism 
   
   
    You’ll explore some of the major themes of international relations using a variety of different sources including novels, essays, manifestos, treatise and film. Power and Order is the underlying theme linking together areas such as imperialism, emancipation, human rights, terrorism and torture among others. The interconnectivity between all of these areas and the sources will help you appreciate texts from the breadth of your studies. There will be 3 hours a week of seminars and lectures for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Democracy and its Critics 
   
   
    You’ll examine the concept and organisation of democracy using primary sources to investigate historic and contemporary debates. You’ll consider the principles and arguments of democracy and its critics as well as the future for democracy in the context of accelerating globalisation. A variety of approaches and methods will be used to help you develop your skills for the study of political theory. You’ll have 3 hours a week of lectures and seminars studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    De-industrialisation: A Social and Cultural History 1970-1990 
   
   
    The module examines the social and cultural impact of economic change in three traditional industrial regions in the UK, Germany and the US in the 1970s and 1980s. It takes thematic approaches, exploring topics including Overlaps and differences between Contemporary History and the Social Sciences; Change and decline in traditional industries such as coal, steel and shipbuilding; Political responses to industrial change, with a particular focus on industrial conflict over closures.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Soviet State and Society 
   
   
    This module examines political, social, cultural and economic transformations in the Soviet Union from the October Revolution of 1917 to the collapse of the state in 1991. The course will look at Russia both from the top down (state-building strategies; leadership change; methods of political rule; economic and social policy) and from the bottom up (societal developments and the changing structures and practices of everyday life). It will pay particular attention to moments and sites of interaction between state and society.   
   
  
      
   
  
    From Runes to ROFL: Language Change in the Germanic Languages 
   
   
    This module will introduce students to the history of the Germanic languages, from the earliest linguistic evidence up to the present day. We will investigate the major sound changes that distinguish Dutch, German and other Germanic languages like English from the rest of the Indo-European language family (which includes French, Greek, and many other European languages, as well as Sanskrit). You'll look at the process by which Dutch and German went their separate ways , ultimately emerging as two standardised languages in the 17th century. You'll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Reason and its Rivals from Kant to Freud 
   
   
    The module discusses a selection of theoretical approaches to modernity, beginning with Kant's assertion of individual reason as the founding stone of enlightened social organisation, and interrogations of that position in the work of Marx and Engels, Nietzsche and Freud. It will discuss historical views on such issues as the nature of the individual subject, different assessments of the social, political or moral contract, and views as to the role and fate of culture in that social organisation, as well as competing ideas of the status of reality as based in social or material conditions or the product of the will, drives, or ideology.   
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Yugoslavia and Successor States since 1941 
   
   
    The aim of this module is to examine developments in the political, social and diplomatic history of Yugoslavia after 1941 leading towards an understanding of the reasons behind the collapse of the country and subsequent violence in the 1990s. You'll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Screening Russia: Film and Society from the Tsars to Putin 
   
   
    In this module you will acquire an in-depth understanding of developments in Russian society and culture as reflected in popular and influential films from the period 1900 to 2010. You’ll examine how films are constructed technically and develop skills in analysing cinema in its historical and social contexts. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Metropolis and Empire: Spain, Portugal and the Americas 1492-1898 
   
   
    This module examines the evolution of Spain, Portugal and their American colonies in the four centuries of Iberian colonialism between 1492 and the movements for independence in Latin America in the 19th century.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Nations and Nation Building in the Lusophone World 
   
  
    This module is designed to give students of Portuguese an introduction to some of the major texts of the Portuguese-speaking world. The commonality of languages derives from the colonial experiences of the Portuguese Empire, which resonate through the cultures from the sixteenth century to the twentieth century. The module will examine the ways in which ideas of nationhood and national identity have been expressed and constructed through the cultures of the Lusophone world.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
     
  
   Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
  
    Politics and Drugs 
   
   
    This module studies the implications of the growing abuse of narcotics for the political system from both a national and international perspective. It will examine the production, consumption and trade in drugs as an international problem. The development of and issues associated with contemporary British drug policy will be explored and the theoretical questions raised by drug control policy will be examined.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Weapons of Mass Destruction 
   
   
    This module introduces a range of debates concerning weapons of mass destruction (WMD) to give you an appreciation of the importance of the issue. The reasons for states to develop or acquire WMDs will be explored through core concepts such as deterrence, the security dilemma and organisation theory.  You will discuss whether WMDs are good or bad and if Britain should build a missile defence system among other topics. 3 hours a week are spent in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Photography in French Culture 
   
   
    This module explores the significance of photography in nineteenth- and twentieth-century French culture through the study of a number of important historical and theoretical texts and relevant visual material. It focuses on four major historical and thematic areas: nineteenth-century debates about photography; the conception and use of photography in Surrealism; the role of photography in post-war French society; photography as a means of self-exploration and expression.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Individual and Society 
   
   
    You’ll explore the ways in which French social theory and fiction have thought through the changing nature of the individual and the self in society. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and workshops each week studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Brazilian Slave Society 
   
   
    This module aims to provide students with an understanding of the centrality of the history of slavery in the study of Brazilian society and of the significance of Brazilian Slavery in both the transatlantic slave systems and slave societies in the Americas. The module introduces students to the different disciplinary approaches to the study of slavery in Brazil. This will require students to draw on comparative contexts of slavery across the Americas both thematically and theoretically.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Petersburg Text 
   
   
    Through three hours of lectures and seminars each week, you’ll undertake an in-depth analysis of the Russian imperial capital, St Petersburg and its artistic representations. You will study the development of the image of St Petersburg in Russian poetry (Pushkin, Blok, Akhmatova, Mandelshtam) and prose (Gogol, Dostoevsky, Bely, Bitov) of both the 19th and 20th centuries. You’ll also be given a historical overview of the evolution of the legend of St Petersburg, its representations in folklore, and readings of its urban landscape.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Serbian and Croatian Cinema 
   
   
    Developing your ability in addressing the study of cinema, this module examines the ways in which themes, motifs and narrative structures of films combine to produce semantically complex interfaces through which they also reflect the cultural circumstances of their production. In an average week you’ll spend around six hours in lectures, seminars and film viewings.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Civil War and Memory Wars in Contemporary Spain 
   
   
    The course will highlight the profoundly Spanish economic, political, social and cultural context in which the civil war arose and was fought. However, students will also be encouraged to view this period in Spanish history within a wider European context. Spain's fratricidal conflict was merely one episode - albeit an enormously significant one - in the longer 'European civil war' of the twentieth century. The problems facing Spain as it struggled to adapt to modernity, and the emergence of competing 'solutions' to these problems, mirrored similar developments across Europe. In the second half of the module, students will examine the recent politicisation of 'memory' of this period in Spanish history.   
   
  
      
   
  
    The Missing Dimension: Intelligence and International History in the Twentieth Century 
   
   
    The history of secret intelligence was once called the ‘missing dimension’ in the study of politics and international relations. Today, it has established itself as a separate field of historical enquiry. This module will examine how the study of secret intelligence has informed and sometimes even altered our understanding of some of the major political and international crises of the twentieth century. You will spend three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Second World War in Modern Dutch Fiction 
   
  
    This module will investigate narratives of the Second World War and its aftermath in the Netherlands and Belgium in the novels of Harry M 
    &uuml;lisch (1927-2010) and Hugo Claus (1929-2008), the two heavyweights of Dutch-language literature in the twentieth century. We will look at the historical background of the novels as well as their literary form, and analyse how they reflect both historical and contemporary attitudes to the Second World War in the Low Countries.   
   
  
      
   
  
    The Language of Social Media 
   
   
    Language is constantly changing and nowhere more so than on social media, where users constantly adapt their language to achieve their communicative goals and to overcome the lack of face-to-face contact with their communication partners. In this module we explore the ways in which the German language is used on various kinds of social media, and how this often differs from standard German. We study the state-of-the-art linguistic research into online communication and non-standard language use. At the same time, students carry out their own research, collecting and analysing data from various social media sources: because of the ever-evolving nature of online language use, this often involves investigating phenomena that are so new, they haven't been properly studied yet! On this module you have three hours of teaching per week alongside extensive private study (which doesn't just involve reading, but also data collecting and analysis): we spend one hour in a computer room collecting data to test a particular hypothesis followed by an hour in which we analyse the data; a third hour, later in the week, is spent learning about and discussing theories of online language use. There is a strong focus on small group work in the module: the in-class research and analysis are done in groups of three to five students, and then presented to the whole class.