Modules  
  This combined honours degree enables you to study three languages, one of them from beginners’ level if you wish. Each language represents a third of your yearly credits.   
  Alongside your compulsory language modules, you may choose optional modules from each of the departments related to your chosen languages. These often focus on topics such as history, literature or culture relating to the country or region you are interested in.  
  Depending on your beginners’ language choice, you may take fewer optional modules in the first two years, so that you can concentrate on intensive language acquisition.   
  You can choose three languages from post-A level: French, German, Portuguese, Russian or Spanish.  
  OR two post-A level (from the list above) and one beginners’ language: Dutch, French, German, Portuguese, Serbian/Croatian, Slovene or Spanish.  
  N.B You cannot take more than one language from beginners’ level.   
  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.
   
  
     
  Language Modules  
  You will take language modules at the appropriate level throughout the course. Post-A level language instruction builds on your existing skills and develops your competence in reading, writing, speaking and listening. If you are a beginner, you will take an intensive course that is structured to take you from beginners’ or GCSE level to degree level in four years. You will take the same language modules as post-A level students in the final year of the course, and you thus graduate with the same language level.
    
  Modules taken alongside your language work  
  Students on this degree course will typically take core modules in the first year of study and select from a range of optional modules in the second and final year of the course. Beginners normally follow a set programme in their beginners’ language in the first two years of the course. For more details of optional modules in your particular language combination, please see the relevant web page for the single honours course of those languages. 
    
  
   Year One   
  
  
  
    Introduction to French and Francophone Studies 
   
   
   You will receive a firm grounding in the structures of French through the core language module. You will also follow a core module 'Introduction to French and Francophone Studies' which will prepare you for studying the range of topics and skills you will develop in your degree course. You will also choose optional modules in French literature and the history and politics of contemporary France. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to German Studies: Unity and Diversity in German Identities 
   
  
    This core 20-credit module introduces you to some of the key areas of German Studies that you can go on to study in German over the course of your degree: linguistics, literature, translation studies, film, history, politics and society, and cultural studies. You will choose to specialize in some of these areas in your degree; for others, this module provides you with a basic foundation which will be useful to you as a student of German Studies. The module also helps you learn and practise the key skills that you will need in your degree and beyond: not just taking exams, but also researching, reading and taking notes, writing essays, and making oral presentations: the same skills that you will take with you into your future careers. It also helps you gain experience in reading and listening to a wide range of German language - informal and formal, literary and academic, for example, so that you develop your ability to use German in your studies and in your career.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Nation, Myth, Identity: Introduction to Russian and Slavonic Studies 
   
   
   This module introduces students to important areas and topics in Russian and Slavonic Studies, examining important aspects of the histories and cultures of the region, as well as aspects of the languages, cultures and literary traditions. You will learn to analyse a wide range of cultural phenomena, including pictures, music, film, literary texts and other kinds of written sources. 
   
  
      
   
  
    History of the Low Countries 
   
  
    This module will introduce students to selected topics in the history of the Low Countries from the sixteenth century to the present day. It will focus on a number of key events and periods such as the fall of Antwerp in 1585, the Belgian Revolution of 1830, the Flemish Movement and the Second World War. 
   You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Literature in Spanish 
   
   
   You’ll read a series of key texts from Spain and Spanish America. Its purpose is to impart an essential body of literary-historical and cultural knowledge relating to the main periods, genres and conventions of literature in Spanish from the Middle Ages to the modern period. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Lusophone Societies and Cultures 
   
   
   The Portuguese speaking-world is made up of people on four different continents: Europe, Africa, Asia and the Americas, and there are eight countries in which Portuguese remains the official language. The spread of the language is a representation of the reach of the Portuguese Empire at its height as well as a reflection of the legacy of Lusophone cultures. This module provides you with the opportunity to learn about the diversity of cultural practices and social relations in the different parts of the world where Portuguese is spoken. The module covers the major social and cultural practices from modern Lusophone societies, including aspects of popular culture such as football and soap operas, but also cultural and artistic currents in literature and film. Questions of social relations and identity are also examined through a consideration of religious practice and religious expression, as well as themes of conflict, crisis and revolution through formations of political identity and political mobilisation. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Culture and Society in the Low Countries 
   
  
    This module will examine the development of the Netherlands and Belgium since the First World War with particular reference to: the period from 1945 to the present day; society in the Netherlands and Belgium; aspects of Dutch and Flemish culture.  
   
  
      
   
  
    French 1  
   
  
    You'll develop your understanding of the French language including grammar, written expression, aural and oral skills. 3 hours per week will be spent in lectures, workshops, and oral classes with a native speaker studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    French 1 - Beginners 
   
  
    The module focuses on the intensive study from beginners' level of the five key skills of listening, speaking, writing, reading, and grammatical competence. The module will use a set text book, but this will also be supplemented with other exercises and materials designed to work towards the specific requirements of a degree programme in French Studies, whereby students come into contact with modules in French literature, culture, history or linguistics.  
   
  
      
   
      
  
 
     
  
  
   Year Two   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Introduction to Translation Studies 
   
   
    The module introduces the key concepts of translation theory, such as equivalence, text type, skopos alongside relevant linguistic theories such as register and relevance, as well as key topics of translation studies, such as cultural issues in translation, the role of the translator, the influence of centre and periphery.  
   
  
      
   
   Selected optional modules  
  
    French 2 
   
  
    Building upon the language module studied in Year One, you will further improve your skills in reading, listening, speaking, creative writing and translation. You will spend two hours per week in workshops and in oral classes with a native speaker for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    French 2 - beginners 
   
  
    The module builds on the intensive language study undertaken in the first year, developing the skills of listening, speaking, writing, reading and grammatical competence. In this way it is anticipated that, by the end of the second year, students will be linguistically equipped to cope with the challenges of the year abroad.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary France and Globalisation 
   
  
    This module looks at contemporary French society in the context of an increasingly globalised culture and economy. The module analyses recent attempts to defend, redefine and adapt key aspects of French economic and cultural life in order to negotiate ways of living in an era of globalisation. The material in the module focuses on key debates around globalisation. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Francophone Africa: Exploring Contemporary Issues 
   
  
    This module explores a range of political and social issues relevant to contemporary sub-Saharan Francophone Africa through literature, film and popular culture. It also offers an overview of the history of the French language in Africa and introduces students to the range of varieties of French spoken there today.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Post-War French Theatre 
   
  
    Examining the experimental theatre which flourished in France in the 1950s and 1960s, you'll consider authors such as Genet, Beckett and Ionesco. Focusing on dramatic technique, theory, and performance, you'll spend around two hours per week studying in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Quebecois Writing 
   
  
    This module offers an introduction to Quebecois writing and the light it throws on the development of a Quebecois cultural identity. Three texts from the 1960s and 1980s are related to their historical, political, social and cultural background. Students look at how a traditional, French-speaking, North American, catholic population reacted to the pressures and opportunities of modernization and developed a new confidence in themselves as Quebecois.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Modern Spanish and Spanish American Literature and Film 
   
   
   This module explores a cultural period in the Hispanic world characterised by profound social change and the emergence of major world-figures of modern art (e.g. Picasso). It is structured around key literary and artistic movements from Spain and Spanish America from the early nineteenth century to the latter part of the twentieth, movements such as Romanticism, Realism, Symbolism-Decadence/Modernismo, the Avant-garde, and Modernism. You’ll spend two hours per week in classes. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Sociolinguistics: An Introduction 
   
   
   In this introduction to sociolinguistics, you’ll consider the social contexts of language use, paying particular attention to intercultural communication, politeness, linguistic determinism, language choice, speech act theory, and approaches to the study of speech. You’ll be required to do weekly readings and to engage in discussions during a two hour lecture held once a week. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Runes to ROFL: History of the Germanic Languages 
   
  
    This module will introduce students to the history of the Germanic languages, from the earliest linguistic evidence up to the present day. We will investigate the major sound changes that distinguish Dutch, German and other Germanic languages like English from the rest of the Indo-European language family (which includes French, Greek, and many other European languages, as well as Sanskrit). You'll look at the process by which Dutch and German went their separate ways , ultimately emerging as two standardised languages in the 17th century. You'll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Linguistic Variation in France 
   
   
   You’ll explore the different kinds of linguistic variation in France including those across time periods, geographical variation, social groups, class, and disparity between oral and written forms. You’ll also be introduced to the history of the French language and its recent developments, spending around 2 hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Screening Russia: Film and Society from the Tsars to Putin 
   
   
   In this module you will acquire an in-depth understanding of developments in Russian society and culture as reflected in popular and influential films from the period 1900 to 2010. You’ll examine how films are constructed technically and develop skills in analysing cinema in its historical and social contexts. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars 
   
  
      
   
  
    Building and National Identities in the Lusophone World 
   
   
   In this module you will be introduced to some of the major texts of the Portuguese-speaking world. You will examine the ways in which ideas of nationhood and national identity have been expressed and constructed through cultures of the Lusophone world. You will study the ways in which cultural production is embedded in the formation of nationhood and ideas about national identity and therefore culture are examined through its political and historical context. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Repression and Resistance: Dissidents and Exiles in Russian Culture 
   
   
   This module provides you with an introduction to the themes of dissidence and exile, central notions in Russian literature, culture and thinking, using the examples of the life and work of four major Russian writers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (Pushkin, Dostoevsky, Nabokov, Bulgakov). You will learn the theory of different literary forms (verse narrative, novel, short story and drama). 
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Yugoslavia and Successor States since 1941 
   
   
   The aim of this module is to examine developments in the political, social and diplomatic history of Yugoslavia after 1941 leading towards an understanding of the reasons behind the collapse of the country and subsequent violence in the 1990s. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Year Three   
  
  
  This year is spent abroad working or studying in countries where your chosen languages are spoken. For more information, please visit the School of Cultures, Languages and Area Studies  
   year abroad page.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Year Four   
  
  
  
    Language and Social Interaction 
   
   
   This year-long module introduces students to the close and detailed study of spoken language as a fundamental resource for human action and social organisation. The normative structures of the mainstream conversation-analytic tradition will be explored. Examination of both ordinary conversation and institutional discourse will enable you to explore the ways in which actions are performed, identities constructed, and context achieved through talk. Students will be expected, and encouraged, to analyse data and discuss their observations. You’ll have two hours of lectures weekly for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    The Language of Social Media 
   
  
    This module will study in depth and on the basis of primary resources the characteristics of the language used on social media and other means of computer-mediated communication (eg. chats, Facebook, Twitter, email, texts). It will also focus on the challenges that the analysis of the language used in these media presents to linguistic theory.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Francophone Writing in Canada 
   
   
   This module studies a selection of texts which have played a significant part in establishing a tradition of Canadian writing in French. The module includes texts by both Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois and non-Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois writers. The texts are studied in the context of the specific cultures to which they belong and of the reception they found. You will spend two hours a week in lectures and seminars for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Translation and Linguistic Exchange 
   
  
    This module offers in-depth discussion of grammatical, lexical and idiomatic aspects of German and English as well as issues of translation, register and cultural difference. It will be taught primarily through the medium of translation, both from and into German, using a variety of texts and passages on a range of topics and in a range of registers. Groupwork between home students and Erasmus students will foster dialogue about linguistic and translation issues as well as general cultural exchange. 
   
  
      
   
  
    The Petersburg Text 
   
   
   Through three hours of lectures and seminars each week, you’ll undertake an in-depth analysis of the Russian imperial capital, St Petersburg and its artistic representations. You will study the development of the image of St Petersburg in Russian poetry (Pushkin, Blok, Akhmatova, Mandelshtam) and prose (Gogol, Dostoevsky, Bely, Bitov) of both the 19th and 20th centuries. You’ll also be given a historical overview of the evolution of the legend of St Petersburg, its representations in folklore, and readings of its urban landscape. 
   
  
      
   
  
    East European and Balkan Cultural Studies 
   
  
    The module examines issues covering the division of Europe into East and West, the West's construction of Russian, East European and Balkan identities in its own imagination, relations between dominant and subordinate cultures in Europe, theoretical frameworks in which to examine intercultural relations (semiotics, orientalism).Texts from mainly British sources are analysed as examples of such constructions (travelogues, popular fiction, film, journalism). The module also includes the influence of such largely negative views on identity formation within Eastern Europe and the Balkans. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Russian Language in the 20th Century 
   
   
   You’ll focus on the development of the Russian language during the 20th century in relation to the changing socio-political climate of the period. This modules looks at language as a social and ideologically-charged product and topics covered include the Soviet language and national policies, social stratification of languages, Marxist linguistics, linguistic purism in the Soviet and post-Soviet period, globalisation and post-Soviet Russian language identity. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Civil War and Memory Wars in Contemporary Spain 
   
   
   This module will give you an understanding of the origins of the Spanish Civil War, the character of the war itself, the factors which determined its outcome, and the implications of that outcome for Spanish history since 1939. The module will also consider the legacy of this period of history in contemporary Spanish politics and culture. You’ll have 1 two-hour seminar each week to study for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Lusophone Identities, Culture, and Modernity in Portugal and Africa 
   
   
   In this module you will focus on identities and identity formation, as represented or articulated in literary, cinematic and visual texts, as the basis of a chronological survey of the development of Lusophone societies and culture in the 20th century. You will focus on two particular areas: the political ramifications of contending conceptions of race, gender, and sexuality in the last century and the role of cultural identity and ‘identity’ politics’ in nation-building and in the negotiation of, and recovery from, collective crises such as regime change and civil conflict. For this module you will have a one 2-hour seminar each week.