Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer;  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
   
    Understanding the Past- Introduction to Archaeology  
   
  
    This module will provide you with an introduction to Archaeology as a discipline. It covers the development of the subject and examines methods for discovering, recovering and analysing archaeological remains. Archaeological prospection/survey, excavation, post-survey/excavation analysis, approaches to dating, materials analysis and an introduction to frameworks of social interpretation are all themes addressed within the module, which also introduces some of the key practical skills for archaeology. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures, seminars, practical classes, and computer workshops on average taking up about 2 hours per week across a full year.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Forests to Farmers: Prehistoric Archaeology of Britain  
   
  
    This module provides an overview of the archaeology of the British Isles from the earliest traces of human activity until the Roman invasion of Britain. It will introduce students to key concepts in prehistoric archaeology through study of the major archaeological finds and sites of the period from henges to the hillforts of Wessex. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 4 hours per week across the autumn semester.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Rome to Revolution: Historical Archaeology of Britain  
   
  
    This module provides students with an overview of the archaeology of the British Isles from the Roman invasion until the industrial revolution. Using key sites and discoveries, students will be introduced to the challenges of understanding the archaeology of periods partially documented in textual sources. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 4 hours per week across the spring semester.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Introduction to Art History I  
   
  
    This module introduces you to issues surrounding the making, display, and the act of collecting art objects in different media. You will examine the ways in which these objects were created, factors that led to their creation and the impact of the material condition of the object on its interpretation. In addition, you will look at your study and writing skills relevant to the analysis of the works of art from a variety of media and a variety of historical and geographical backgrounds. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one 2-hour seminar.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Introduction to Art History II  
   
  
    This core module studied in conjunction with Introduction to Art History I builds on the foundation laid in the aforementioned module in the autumn semester. You will examine the interpretation of objects by considering different forms of writing on art, including art-historical texts, and their changing pre-occupations. Study and writing skills will feature as constants throughout the semester. In addition, where possible there will be visits to local art collections. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one 2-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
   
    Matisse, Picasso, Duchamp  
   
  
    In this module, you will study developments in art in Paris between around 1905 to the outbreak of the First World War. The primary focus is on painting, though you will also investigate the relationship between painting and sculpture, as well as between the art object and non-art. Taking in the competing versions of figure composition in the works of Matisse, Derain and Picasso, you will go on to consider the 'Private Cubism' of Picasso and Braque alongside the so-called 'Salon Cubism' of Delauney, Metzinger and Gleizes. The teaching programme consists of one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Inventing French Art: From the Renaissance to Louis XIV  
   
  
    This module aims to give an overview of French art in the 16th and 17th centuries, examining the functions of art and architecture against social, political and institutional contexts such as the royal court, the Acad&eacute;mie, the growth of Paris and the invention of a national artistic tradition. The teaching is delivered through one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Art and Power: Paris 1937  
   
  
    This module focuses on the International Exhibition in Paris in 1937, which provides a survey of art in the service of politics in the years preceding World War II. Participating countries - including the USSR, Germany, Italy, and Spain - were represented by national pavilions combining art and architecture to articulate national values and ambitions. The cultural battles between contrasting styles of state sponsored art, such as Soviet Socialist Realism and German Neoclassicism, will be examined in light of political and military conflicts in a Europe divided by the Spanish Civil War. Important individual works, such as Picasso's Guernica, will be considered alongside the pavilions as unified artworks. The module consists of one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Plural Arts Histories  
   
  
    In this module, you will be examining selected pieces of art, architecture, and drama from classical Greece, China, Europe, colonial and postcolonial Americas, with some reference to contemporary examples, in order to explore some fundamental questions about art, such as: what is the relationship between creators and the world in which they live? How are the arts made, used, and regarded? In each case, the production and reception of the arts is studied through a contextual approach, paying attention to political, economic, religious, and cultural factors. The module consists of one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Art in America 1945-1980  
   
  
    This module introduces and examines some of the major themes and movements to emerge in American art after 1945, including Abstract Expressionism, Neo-Dada, Pop Art, and Conceptual Art. You will consider the historical and cultural contexts of art in a range of media, including painting, sculpture, installation and performance. You will look at some of the key critical responses to American modern art, and will investigate the extent to which post-1945 practices were radically new or whether they were informed by awareness of pre-war and/or European avant-garde practices. For this module you will have a single 1-hour lecture and a single 1-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Courts and Princes in Renaissance Italy, 1450-1520  
   
   
    This module examines painting, architecture and sculpture at the courts of Ferrara, Mantua, Naples, Urbino and Milan in the period 1420-1520 and suggests that the small princely courts of Italy played an important role in shaping ‘the Renaissance’. Princes at courts competed for the services of the 'best' artists, and Leonardo da Vinci, Pisanello, Piero della Francesca and Andrea Mantegna were just some of the masters who worked for these Courts. This module draws both on established literature, but also seeks to incorporate more recent research questions regarding gender and material culture. As such, this module introduces students to questions that will be developed further in modules in second and third year. The role of women at court, and as patrons, will also be considered. The module focuses on: art as political propaganda; decoration of public and private spaces; establishment and celebration in art of dynasties; an image of the 'Prince'. Other issues of interest include an investigation into the link between political systems (Courts in this instance) and the type of commissions favoured by the patron; also, artists and cultural exchange between different courts, both within Italy and beyond.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
   
    Archaeological Research: Theory and Practice  
   
  
    This module is aimed at helping students to develop more advanced research skills and to discover the methods that are used in major archaeological research projects. In particular students will be introduced to the research methods that they will put into practice in their third year dissertation or independent project. The teaching is delivered in a mix of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Optional  
   
    Introduction to the Archaeology of the Roman Empire  
   
  
    This module provides an overview of the archaeology of the Roman Empire, developing themes encountered in the first year Rome to Revolution module. It traces the development of the Roman world and examines the archaeology of the Empire’s provinces. Specific themes in this course include town, villas and the countryside, and housing the army among other related topics. For this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week across the year.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    The Medieval World  
   
  
    This module considers the archaeology of Europe and the Mediterranean from the end of the Roman Empire to the high Middle Ages (from c. AD 400–1400). Key topics include: the formation of post-Roman societies; rural settlement; the emergence of central places and the development of towns; trade and exchange; and the introduction of Christianity and the role of the Church. The lectures and seminars, totalling around 2 hours per week, will explore integrated approaches to archaeological evidence incorporating landscapes, standing buildings, excavated sites and material culture.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Underwater Archaeology  
   
   
   This module provides you with a broad introduction to the current methods and practice of underwater archaeology. The module focuses on themes such as lake dwellings, shipwrecks, submerged cities and sunken harbours. Case studies are used ranging in space from Scandinavia to Australia and in time from BC 1500 to the last century. Some of the issues tackled in this module include; Methods and techniques of underwater excavation, Problems of conservation and underwater material, sunken harbours, cities and processes of submergences and lake dwellings and freshwater archaeology among others. For this module you will have 2 hours of lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Mediterranean Prehistory  
   
  
    This module examines the background to its rise and nature of the first civilisations of Europe: the Minoan and Cycladic cultures of the Early Bronze Age in the Aegean. It takes a long chronological perspective, and places particular emphasis on the ‘proto-urban’ cultures of the Early Bronze Age, the first rise of palatial civilisation on Crete, the development of Iron Age societies in Greece and Italy, and what we can learn about them through archaeology. For this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars, on average taking up about 2 hours per week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Art at the Tudor Courts, 1485-1603  
   
   
    This module will provide an introduction to visual art at the Tudor courts, from the accession of Henry VII in 1485 to the death of Elizabeth I in 1603. In doing so, it takes account of a wide range of art forms, from portraiture to pageantry, jewellery to the book. Key issues dealt with in lectures and seminars include contemporary theories of visuality and monarchy, the particular context of court culture, and the use of visual material in the service of self -fashioning. It considers the impact of major historical developments including the reformation and the advent of print. As such, the relationship of the arts to politics is a key theme. Through exploring the highly sophisticated uses of visual art at the Tudor courts, the course seeks to re-evaluate the common idea that English art at the time was isolationist and inferior to that of continental Europe.  
   
  
      
   
   
    British Romantic Art  
   
   
    This module examines aspects of art in Britain in the period c.1790 to c.1850. We begin with the difficulty of framing a coherent narrative that makes sense of the diverse kind of art produced in this period. We will go on to consider individual careers within the context of the London art world, looking at the institutions, exhibitions and networks that determined the character of British art. What does it mean to call a work of art or an artist Romantic? Does Romanticism still have any usefulness as a descriptive term, or should we abandon it if we are to understand how artists functioned within a commercial culture?  
   
  
      
   
   
    Futurism  
   
   
    This module explores the Italian Futurist movement as a pioneering project in multimedia experimentation, which included painting, sculpture, architecture, design, photography, film, performance, typography, literature, fashion, and music. It investigates the movement’s apparent rejection of Italy’s cultural heritage and celebration of twentieth century technology, from the speed of the motorcar to the violence of modern warfare. The political objectives of the Futurists will be considered, including the movement’s complex relationship with Fascism. The publicity strategies of the group, such as the extensive use of manifestoes and provocative public interventions, will also be examined. The module will cover the period from Futurism’s headline-grabbing conception in 1909 through to the end of its second manifestation in the 1940s.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Realism and Impressionism, 1840-1890  
   
   
    This module examines two of the most influential movements in Western art, Realism and Impressionism. We will consider the major figures and critical debates in the history of modern art. Among the artists to be studied are Courbet, Bonheur, Millet, Manet, Morisot, Degas, Cassatt, Renoir, and others. This module includes the study of different critical approaches to the study of art works and visual culture.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   Either:
   
   
   
    Dissertation in Archaeology  
   
   
    The module involves the production of a dissertation (7,000 words) on a project approved by your supervisor, involving the culmination of the range of reading, learning, and graphic or photographic skills acquired during the first two years of the course. The module consists of one 1-hour tutorial each week. This option is also available as a year-long, 12,000-14,000 word dissertation.  
   
  
      
   
   Or:  
   
    Dissertation in History of Art  
   
   
    The module involves an in-depth, semester-long study of a topic in the history of art following consultation with a tutor and approval from the module convener/ Head of Department. The module convener will allocate a tutor in consultation with the student, dependent on the availability of staff. By the end, you will have demonstrated skill in researching and managing information, as well as having developed your written skills. There is a minimum requirement of two hours supervision with your tutor, with further time allocated at their discretion. Regular attendance at tutorials/ workshops is a requirement for the completion of this module. This option is also available as a full-year dissertation.  
   
  
      
   
   And:  
   
    Independent Research Project  
   
  
    Students not undertaking a dissertation in archaeology will carry out an independent research project in the autumn or spring semester, using skills they have acquired in earlier modules to research a subject of their choice under the guidance of an appropriate supervisor. For this module you will meet with you supervisor in individual tutorials.
    
   
  
      
   
    Optional   
   
    European Avant-Garde Film  
   
  
    This module examines avant-garde cinema in the early 20th century Europe. It will begin by exploring what is meant by the term ‘avant-garde’ and considering the development of experimental filmmaking in the context of artistic movements such as futurism, Cubism, Dada, surrealism and constructivism. You will focus on developments in Germany, France and the Soviet Union during the 1920s and 1930s, and consider key trends from abstract animation to cinema pur. The module will highlight some key concerns of non-mainstream cinema such as narrative, abstraction, reflexivity, spectatorship, movement, time and space. You will also examine the engagement of experimental film with modernity, considering both aesthetic and political strategies of the European avant-gardes. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Landscape in Britain since 1800  
   
  
    This module is concerned with the landscape as a genre in Britain over a period of two centuries, and will investigate representations across a range of media, from painting and watercolour to photography and film. Key themes include: landscape, pleasure and anxiety, the tourist viewpoint, nostalgia and modernity, environmental and land art, new forms of landscapes practice, and ruin, waste and change. For this module you will have one 1-hour and one 2-hour seminar each week. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Beastly Questions  
   
  
    This module is about the human-animal relationships that are fundamental to all societies, through its shaping of diets, economies, landscapers and beliefs, and cultural ideologies. The study of the human-animal interaction can provide detailed insight into the structure and worldview of past societies. During the course you will investigate a wide range of issues including: the hunter gatherer/ farming transition, the impact of the Roman Empire, the creation and meaning of ancient landscapes, expressions of social status, ethnicity, and gender. For this module you will have a combination of lectures, seminars and workshops for one semester. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
    American Visual Culture  
   
   
    The module examines the visual culture of America from the late 19th century to the present day. The module explores how visual culture – art, advertising, architecture, cinema, television, cartography, video, the internet and images of science – has transformed and shaped the image of the United States. The module looks closely at a series of themes: urban and rural landscapes, icons and iconography, art and photography, race and gender in the US, high and low culture, sex and sexuality. The module also introduces various visual and critical theories which help us better understand the visual cultures of the United States of America.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Renaissance Luxuries: Art and Good Living in Italy 1400-1600  
   
  
    This module seeks to engage with the Renaissance as a period of conspicuous consumption of a range of luxury goods, and examines the social, cultural and economic factors which characterised the period 1400-1600.  Amongst the issues raised in lectures and seminars will be the importance of objects as signifier of status, magnificence, the diversification of objects and the concomitant rise in specialised living arrangements, and women as consumers of art. In this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and a one 2-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Rome and the Mediterranean  
   
   
    In this module you will examine the archaeological evidence for the Roman period in Italy and the Mediterranean from 300 BC to AD 550. The major social, cultural and economic changes of the region in this period will be discussed as well as in the context of wider historical and archaeological approaches to the Mediterranean. You’ll have an hour of lectures and an hour-long seminar for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
    The Archaeology of the Medieval City  
   
   
    The aim of this module is to provide you with a broad knowledge of the archaeological evidence for the development of cities and urban life in the later medieval period AD 1000-1500, with a focus on English towns and cities in their wider Europe context. The module will explore the integration of varied sources of archaeological evidence including urban landscapes, buildings and material culture, and particular emphasis placed on interdisciplinary approaches to urban economic and social life. For this module you will have a combination of lectures, seminars, workshops and a fieldtrip over the period of 11 weeks.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fascism, Spectacle and Display  
   
   
    This module will examine cultural production during Italy’s fascist regime. There will be an emphasis on the experience of visual culture in public settings such as the exhibition space, the cinema, and the built environment. A wide range of cultural artefacts will be examined, paying attention to material as well as visual aspects. Visual material will be situated in the social, cultural and political circumstances of the period. Key themes will include the tensions between tradition and modernity, and regionalism, nationalism, and internationalism.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Mobility and the Making of Modern Art  
   
   
    New technologies of mobility have long been a defining condition of modernity. It is from this perspective that we will examine modern art while highlighting the interrelated components of movement and speed – mechanized motion, temporality and their political connotations (e.g., social, ideological, artistic trends). This module includes a range of works, mainly paintings, from the mid nineteenth century to the early twentieth century. We will also consider photography and other pre-cinematic forms of moving images such as optical devices, peepshows, and panoramas that added different motion and time to representation. A key question is the role of artists in naturalizing the equation between mobility, modernity, and the West. To this end, our consideration will involve non-Western representations to explore the ideological and economic implications of mobility.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Performance Art  
   
   
    This module traces the development of performance art from the 1950s to the 1980s. It considers the work of a number of artists in America and Europe in terms of their focus on the body of the artist, the dematerialization of the art object, and the changing role of the audience or viewer. Students will engage with a range of theories of identity, gender and selfhood; phenomenology and participation; duration, temporality and impermanence pain, endurance and abjection. Exploring performance art’s relationship with other visual art forms, including dance, experimental music, film and television, this module considers and evaluates the art historical genealogies of performance art and body art and examines the ways in which performance art has shifted the terms of art history. In addition, it will consider the issues at stake in constructing a history of performance art, and in documenting, exhibiting, and writing about ephemeral, invisible, or indeterminate practices.