Modules  
  You can choose from two options:  
  
   
    One language, with around 4 modules from the lead language department alongside around 4 translation-related modules per year.   
    Two languages, with modules from each lead department alongside three translation-related modules in years 1 and 2, and two in year 4  
   
  
  You must take at least one post A-level language. If you are taking a second language, this may begin at post A-level or beginners’ level. Languages offered for this degree are as follows:  
  Post A-level: French, German, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish.   
 
   Please note: Portuguese may only be taken in conjunction with another post-A level language (i.e. only in the 2 languages + translation model)   
  
  
   
  
  
  Beginners’: Dutch, 
  French, 
  German, 
  Portuguese, 
  Russian, Serbian/Croatian, Slovene, 
  Spanish  
  
  
   
  
 
   You will choose a language combination from the list above and follow core language modules appropriately. You will then choose the remainder of your credits from optional modules from the departments which are relevant to your choice.
   
   The options below are representative and are subject to change.
   
  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules
   
  
  
   
    Translation-Related Modules  
   
  
     
    
   
     Introduction to Translating and Interpreting 
    
   
     This module tackles myths about translation and interpreting and will also provide an insight into key issues in translation studies by allowing you to reflect on what translation and interpreting 
    activities involve (accuracy, fluency, freedom, machine-translation, ethics). You’ll also be introduced to translation and interpreting issues in relation to different genres/topical matters, such  
    as machine-translation (allowing the introduction of technological tools for translators) and careers in translation and interpreting.  The module will involve different collaborative projects as a way of preparing you for work in the translation/interpreting industry. The module is year-long and you’ll spend 2 hours in lectures and seminars weekly.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Exploring Language and Linguistics 
    
   
     The purpose of this module is to introduce you to issues which will give you a better understanding of the structure and the working principles of the language in general, as well as prepare you 
    for the study of translation and interpreting. You will deal with the genetic relation between languages, focusing on the similarities and dissimilarities between language families, and introduces students to the basic notions of language structure. For this module there will be a one-hour lecture and a one-hour seminar weekly.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Language Meaning, Variation and Change 
    
   
     The module follows on from Exploring Language and Linguistics. The main goal of the module is to introduce students to the functional aspects of language. The module focusses primarily on the 
    relationships between language and society and covers such areas as historical and stylistic change, social and regional diversity, and concepts drawn from semantics and linguistic pragmatics. For this module you will have a one-hour lecture as well as an hour-long seminar weekly.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    
   French and Francophone Studies
    
    
   
   
   
     Introduction to French and Francophone Studies 
    
   
     A core module that introduces you to the main areas in which you can opt to specialise during the course of your degree and helps you develop key academic skills. The topics include: France 
    and its languages, French identities, le monde francophone, gender issues, French thought, and visual culture. The module is year-long and you’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     France: histoire et mythologies 
    
   
     An introduction to French history since the late Middle Ages, you’ll study a series of historical figures, their lives and times, considering how their 'stories' are written and woven into the 
    fabric of 'le roman de la nation'. The module focuses in particular on visual culture and representation. You’ll spend around 2 hours a week in lectures and workshops for this module. 
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Contemporary France 
    
   
     You’ll learn about the French economy, social class, gender and women's rights, spending around 2 hours per week in lectures and workshops. 
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
   More Options
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   German Studies   
   
   
   
     Introduction to German Studies 
    
   
     This year-long module provides an introduction to the study of German and is compulsory for most students of German. It covers the main fields of German Studies: literature, culture, 
    history, linguistics, media and film. You will be introduced to the study skills required for academic study: critical and analytic skills, reading skills, presentation skills and writing skills. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study. 
     
    
   
       
    
   
     History of the Low Countries from the Golden Age to the Second World War 
    
   
     In this module you’ll be introduced to selected topics in the history of Low Countries from the 16th Century to present day. It will focus on a number of key events and periods such as the fall of 
    Antwerp in 1585, the Belgian Revolution of 1830, the Flemish movement and the Second World War. For this module you’ll have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar per week.
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
    Reading German Culture 
    
    
    In this module you’ll analyse short literary and popular texts (including film) which reflect life in the metropolis and chosen because of their representative status of key phases in German  
    historical and social development in the 20th Century ( the 20s, the immediate postwar-period, post-unification Berlin). In exploring cultural representations of urban life the course will answer  
    key questions such as: how do textual perceptions of the ‘big’ city reflect attitudes towards relationships conditioned by class, gender and race? For this module you’ll have one 2-hour seminar each week.
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
   More Options
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Russian and Slavonic Studies   
   
   
   
     From Tsarism to Communism: Introduction to Russian History and Culture 
    
   
     This module introduces you to the development of Russian history and culture, starting with the reign of Peter the Great (1682-1725), following the development of Russia into a modern state through to the end of the 19th century, and ending with a survey of the Bolshevik Revolution and the Soviet period (1917-1991). Alongside the history of Russia, you will study aspects of Russian culture relevant to different periods of its history (such as painting, architecture, music, folklore and religious beliefs).You will have three hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Modern Russian Literature: Texts, Contexts, Approaches 
    
   
     This module introduces the main developments in Russian literature of the 19th and 20th centuries through study of texts by important writers such as Pushkin, Gogol, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov, Zamiatin, Mayakovsky, Akhmatova and Solzhenitsyn. You will learn skills for analysing and discussing literary texts, whether prose, poetry or drama, as well as insights into the historical and political evolution of Russia during this period.
     
    
   
       
    
   
     The Clash of Empires: Introduction to Balkan Cultural Identities 
    
   
     This module introduces you to the cultural history of South Slavs and the legacy of great empires such as the Ottomans, and the Habsburgs on the Balkan peninsula. By focusing on the visual cultures of the three key religious traditions – Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic and Islamic – the module explores the common features and differences in alphabet, architecture, sculpture and painting across the region. You will learn how living under empires informed the self-understanding of Serbs, Croats, Bosniaks and other South Slav nations.
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
   More Options
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Spanish, Portuguese and Latin American Studies   
   
   
   
     Spain and Portugal in the Twentieth Century 
    
   
     In this module you’ll study the evolution of Spanish and Portuguese history, politics and culture from 1898 to the present day. You’ll be encouraged to draw links between the Portuguese and Spanish  
     
     experiences, and place both countries’ experience of the twentieth century within the broader context of European and wider global history in this period. Particular emphasis will be placed upon 
      
     
     
     the development of both countries from a (perceived) position of ‘difference’ and ‘backwardness’ to relatively prosperous, economically developed and culturally diverse members of the European 
      
     
     
     Union. You’ll spend around 4 hours in lectures each week. 
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Introduction to Literature in Spanish 
    
   
     You’ll read a series of key texts from the Peninsula and Spanish America. Its purpose is to impart an essential body of literary-historical and cultural knowledge relating to the main periods, 
    genres and conventions of literature in Spanish from the Middle Ages to the modern period. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Politics and Literature in Contemporary 'Hispanic' Writing 
    
   
     This module aims to develop your knowledge and understanding of the interfaces between literature and politics through the study of the way in which crucial social and political issues are 
    articulated in contemporary Spanish cultural artefacts. You’ll have a weekly two-hour seminar to cover material in this module.
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
   More Options
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   
   Translation-Related Modules   
   
   
   
     Contemporary Translation Studies 
    
    
    
      The module introduces you to the key concepts of translation theory, such as equivalence, text type, and skopos alongside relevant linguistic theories such as register and relevance, Key topics of 
     translation studies, such as cultural issues in translation, the role of the translator, the influence of centre and periphery will also be covered. This module is taught over one semester, and  
     you’ll spend 3-4 hours in lectures and seminars weekly for it. 
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Translation Portfolio 
    
   
     In this module you will be required to build up a portfolio of translations of different text types, including technical/scientific, legal and journalistic texts. Through the practices of 
    translation and editing, you’ll improve your language skills, gain a better understanding of the cultural and linguistic complexities of the translation process, and learn how to research  
    terminology in specialist subject domains. Where possible, one or more of the assignments will be a real-life pro bono assignment or linked to an internship. You will have a 2-hour introductory session for each part of the portfolio and will be supervised individually or in small groups for the remainder of the module.
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   French and Francophone Studies   
   
   
   
     Francophone Africa: Exploring Issues through Culture 
    
   
     This module explores a range of political and social issues relevant to contemporary sub-Saharan Francophone Africa through literature, film and popular culture. It also offers an overview of the 
    history of the French language in Africa and introduces students to the range of varieties of French spoken there today. You’ll have an hour each of seminars and lectures weekly for this course.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Difference and Equality in Post-War French Thought 
    
   
     This module explores the socio-cultural politics of equality through the study of three key texts by prominent French and Francophone thinkers. It considers the equality and inequality of class, 
    gender and race through close readings of the texts within the wider context of twentieth-century French and Francophone history and culture as well as in relation to major philosophical and  
    theoretical ideas and traditions such as semiotics, linguistics, Marxism, postcolonialism, existentialism, feminism and psychoanalysis. You’ll have a hour long seminar weekly plus a workshop to  
    aide your understanding of the module content. 
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Approaches to Post-1990 Fiction 
    
   
     This module offers an introduction to the study of very recent literature through the detailed analysis of three texts dealing with issues arising from late 20th and early 21st century society. 
    Themes considered include immigration, the position of women, reality television and responses to terrorism. You’ll have an hour of lectures and an hour of seminar weekly during this module.
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
   More Options
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   German Studies   
   
   
   
     New German Cinema 
    
   
     Between the mid 1960s and the mid 1980s West German cinema rose to new national and international success due to the work of a number of young directors who were commonly perceived as 
    representatives of a "New" or "Young" German cinema. This module will analyse selected films from this period. You will be introduced to the individual styles of different directors (Fassbinder,
    Herzog, Wenders) as well as to their common thematic preoccupations. The analysis will aim to situate the "New German Cinema" within the contexts both of the development of the film industry and of contemporary social and political developments in West Germany. You will have one 2-hour seminar and one 1-hour workshop per week in addition to four hours of private study.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Reason and Its Rivals from Kant to Freud 
    
   
     This module discusses a selection of theoretical approaches to modernity. You will start by studying Immanuel Kant’s assertion of individual reason as the founding stone of enlightened social  
     
     organisation. You will then explore interrogations of that position in the work of Marx and Engels, Nietzsche and Freud. You will have one 2-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of  
     private study. 
      
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
   More Options
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Russian and Slavonic Studies   
   
   
   
     Serbian and Croatian Literature 
    
   
     You’ll examine major literary movements in Serbia and Croatia during the 20th century, from Modernism to the socially engaged literature of the 1930s, Socialist Realism, literary politics under the Communists in Yugoslavia and the emergence of critical literature in the 1980s and 1990s. You’ll also undertake a textual analysis of representative works from 20th century literature; for example, works by Milos Crnjanski, Ivo Andrić, Miroslav Krleža, Danilo Kiš and Slobodan Selenić. You’ll spend around two hours per week studying in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Repression and Resistance: Dissidents and Exiles in Russian Culture Serbian and Croatian Literature Russian Linguistics: Topics, Tips and Tools 
    
   
     This module provides you with an introduction to the themes of dissidence and exile, central notions in Russian literature, culture and thinking, using the examples of the life and work of four major Russian writers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (Pushkin, Dostoevsky, Nabokov, Bulgakov). You will learn the theory of different literary forms (verse narrative, novel, short story and drama).
     
    
   
       
    
    More Options  
   
  
      
   
   
   Spanish, Portuguese and Latin American Studies   
   
   
   
     Discoveries, Empire and Colonies in the Lusophone World 
    
    
    This module brings together the histories and cultures of key regions of the world in which Portugal establishes varying degrees of colonial rule between the 16th and 20th centuries. In this module  
    you will examine the historical background to the age of Discoveries against which Portugal emerged as a leader in maritime exploration and European Imperialism. You will also examine the  
    historical and political events of Portuguese colonialism and imperialism in Africa and Brazil, with an emphasis on understanding the political and social significance of cultural production in developing countries. In this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars totalling 2 hours per week.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Nation Building and National Identities in the Lusophone World 
    
   
     In this module you will be introduced to some of the major texts of the Portuguese-speaking world. You will examine the ways in which ideas of nationhood and national identity have been expressed 
    and constructed through cultures of the Lusophone world. You will study the ways in which cultural production is embedded in the formation of nationhood and ideas about national identity and therefore culture are examined through its political and historical context. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
   More Options
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
  
 
     
  
  Year Three  
 This year is spent abroad, dividing your time between countries where you can practise your language skills. Please see the School of Cultures, Languages and Area Studies study abroad web pages  
 for more information. Where appropriate, you will be encouraged to spend at least part of the year studying at one of our partner institutions specialising in translation/interpreting or carrying out a translation-related work placement.  
  
  
  
  Typical Final Year Modules   
  
  
   
   Translation-Related Modules   
   
   
   
     Translation Project 
    
   
     In this module you will carry out an extended translation project, applying your knowledge of translation theory and practical translation skills gained and practised during years one and two. You 
    will attend two ‘orientation’ sessions at the beginning of semester, and will subsequently be supported in your work by group or individual supervisions. Where possible, the chosen project may be  
    linked to some of your previous work, undertaken as part of an internship, or for a real-life pro bono assignment.       
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Interpreting 
    
    
    This module will  introduce you to different forms, modes, and models of interpreting as well as the issues that are often encountered by professional interpreters. It will offer opportunities to  
    explore the different techniques/skills required for both simultaneous and consecutive interpretation. The module is seminar-led in order to maximise practice in class with two hours of both lectures and practicals weekly. The main difficulties of interpreting will be examined, along with strategies to deal with them in these classes. 
     
    
   
       
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   French and Francophone Studies   
   
   
   
     Citizenship, Ethnicity and National Identity in Post-War France 
    
   
     This year-long module will examine the range of social, political and philosophical questions raised by mass immigration to France in the post-war period. These questions will be tackled through 
    historical analysis of patterns of migration and changing immigration policies, as well as through the study of relevant films, novels and theoretical texts which engage with questions of citizenship, identity and ethnicity. You’ll have an hour long lecture and an hour-long seminar weekly for this module.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Language and Social Interaction 
    
   
     This year-long module introduces students to the close and detailed study of spoken language as a fundamental resource for human action and social organisation. The normative structures of the 
    mainstream conversation-analytic tradition will be explored. Examination of both ordinary conversation and institutional discourse will enable us to explore the ways in which actions are performed,  
    identities constructed and context achieved through talk. Students will be expected, and encouraged, to analyse data and discuss their observations. You’ll have two hours of lectures weekly for this module.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     People and Propaganda 
    
   
     The module is designed to introduce students to the study of various forms of artistic works in relation to the political and social background of the French Revolutionary decade (1789 - 1799). 
    Consideration of this period will follow a set English-language based history. The course will then consider various case studies of a variety of works (theatre, opera, song, iconography, painting)  
    taken from key moments in the period, studying the reflection of contemporary events in such works, the notion of politically "engaged" arts, and the questions of cultural administration. You’ll attend a lecture and a seminar every week for this module.
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
   More Options
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   German Studies   
   
   
   
     Culture and Society in the Weimar Republic 
    
   
     The Weimar Republic (1919-1933) was one of the most fascinating and culturally productive periods of German history, but it was equally ridden by crises and violent conflicts. This module aims to 
    introduce central issues in the literary and social developments of Weimar Germany. You will study a wide range of materials (literary texts, film, aesthetic and political programmes) to analyse  
    key features of the period. Topics will include the impact of the Great War, developments in the press and the cinema, political confrontations, cabaret, and unemployment. You will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study. 
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Recent Women's Writing 
    
   
     In this module you will explore a number of novels and stories written since 1960 by German-speaking women writers. You will also study selected texts on the cultural, political and social contexts 
    of the rise of the second wave feminism in the 1970’s, the changing position of women in the FRG, GDR and Austria, and the increasing awareness of ethnic pluralities. You will compare texts and  
    contexts and explore a variety of reading strategies developed in feminist criticism. For this module you will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar each week in addition to four hours of private study. 
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
   More Options
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Russian and Slavonic Studies   
   
   
   
     The Petersburg Text 
    
   
     Through three hours of lectures and seminars each week, you’ll undertake an in-depth analysis of the Russian imperial capital, St Petersburg and its artistic representations. You will study the development of the image of St Petersburg in Russian poetry (Pushkin, Blok, Akhmatova, Mandelshtam) and prose (Gogol, Dostoevsky, Bely, Bitov) of both the 19th and 20th centuries. You’ll also be given a historical overview of the evolution of the legend of St Petersburg, its representations in folklore, and readings of its urban landscape.
     
    
   
       
    
   
     East European and Balkan Cultural Studies 
    
    
     The module examines issues covering the division of Europe into East and West, the West’s construction of Russian, East European and Balkan identities in its own imagination, relations between dominant and subordinate cultures in Europe, and theoretical frameworks in which to examine intercultural relations (semiotics, orientalism). You will examine examples of such constructions in travelogues, popular fiction, film and journalism. The module also includes study of the influence of such largely negative views on identity formation within Eastern Europe and the Balkans.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Myths and Memories 
    
    
     This module introduces you to the construction of national and collective memory of the Second World War in Soviet and Russian culture and society. You’ll focus on contemporary and subsequent artistic and social responses to the experience of war, but also look at individual acts of remembering (diaries, reports, letters) in the context of a wider cultural memory. The module is conducted in English and you’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
     
    
   
       
    
    More Options  
   
  
      
   
   
   Spanish, Portuguese and Latin American Studies   
   
   
   
     Lusophone Identities, Culture and Modernity in Portugal and Africa 
    
   
     In this module you will focus on identities and identity formation, as represented or articulated in literary, cinematic and visual texts, as the basis of a chronological survey of the development 
    of Lusophone societies and culture in the 20th century. You will focus on two particular areas: the political ramifications of contending conceptions of race, gender, and sexuality in the last  
    century and the role of cultural indentity and ‘identity’ politics’ in nation-building and in the negotiation of, and recovery from, collective crises such as regime change and civil conflict. For this module you will have a one 2-hour seminar each week. 
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Comparative Modern Literature in the Romance Languages 
    
   
     In this module you will be introduced to the major currents in the 20th Century in the context of finisecular and early 20th century European and American literature and culture in order to situate 
    the latter common preoccupations and formal experiments of writers of poetry and short fiction of various nationalities, languages and cultures. This module consists of two case studies split  
    between the Autumn semester where you will focus on the comparative analysis of works by poets such as Rub&eacute;n Dar&iacute;o and Mallarm&eacute;, Apollinaire and Alberti, and Fernando Pessoa among others. In the  
    Spring semester you will you focus on the parallel developments in the evolution of the short story across a similar range of languages and cultures and include an analysis of short fictions from authors such as Jorge Luis Borges, Jo&atilde;o Guimar&atilde;es Rosa, Carlos Fuentes among others. For this module you will have a one 2-hour seminar each week.
     
     
    
   
       
    
    
   More Options