Modules  
  Find out more about some of our current modules by clicking on the links below. A fuller view of the course structure, including a full list of current optional modules, is offered on the ‘Overview’ tab.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Elements of Music I 
   
  
    This core module will consolidate your knowledge of the fundamental building blocks of music across all periods and genres. Topics will include notation, mode, chord, time and texture. Classes will comprise a weekly lecture and a weekly small-group seminar.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Elements of Music II 
   
  
    This core module focuses upon principles of form construction in music. Topics will include partimenti, baroque forms, song form, sonata and the principles of tonal and thematic relationships. Classes will comprise a weekly lecture and a weekly small-group seminar.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Global Music Studies 
   
  
    This module offers an introduction to the different meanings, practices, and theories of popular and art music from a diverse range of cultures, surveying traditions from Asia, the Americas, Africa, the Middle East, Europe, and the Pacific. It incorporates an introduction to ethnomusicological theory and method. You will have a one hour seminar as well as a 90 minute lecture each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Reasoning and Argument: An Introduction to Philosophical Method 
   
  
    In this module you will learn a series of key skills needed to follow critical methods of philosophical inquiry. It will help you understand the structure and nature of arguments of others and improve your reasoning ability to assist you in your further studies during your course. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Ethics 
   
  
    This module introduces you to some of the main ethical questions studied by philosophers. The first part focuses on some contemporary moral problems (for example, the justification of punishment). The second part of the course looks at some normative ethical theories and concepts that provide ways of approaching such moral problems. The third part of the course considers some challenges to the idea of systematic moral inquiry (such as relativism, egoism and emotivism). You will spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Self, Mind and Body 
   
  
    In this module you will be introduced to the important central issues in philosophy of self, mind and body which continue to be debated to present day. You will examine Descartes’s Meditations focusing on his thoughts on dualism and mind-body interaction, comparing these with other related topics. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Appearance and Reality 
   
  
    In this module you will examine some of the central themes surrounding the work of John Locke, one of the first philosophers who sought to integrate philosophy with our modern scientific worldview. Topics covered include empiricism and science, perception, justification and scepticism and the nature of objects among others. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Elementary Logic 
   
  
    This module provides an introduction to modern logic including technical vocabulary required to aid your understanding of modern philosophical work. You will discuss the symbolism of modern logic, the theory of the structure of thought and practice translation between symbolism and English. You will have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional Modules
   
   
  
    Performance I 
   
  
    You will receive instrumental or vocal lessons (including guidance on programming) from a specialist tutor. These lessons will be complemented by regular, interactive performance workshops examining performance style, stage presentation and recital preparation. You will be assessed through a 15-minute public recital in the Djanogly Recital Hall.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Skills in Composition 
   
  
    This module explores the relationship between musical raw materials and the realisation of their creative potential by examining a wide range of compositional techniques and musical styles. Topics include musical textures and forms, scales, basic serial techniques, and contrasting harmonic idioms. You will have a one hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Repertoires I 
   
  
    This core module introduces you to key developments in Early Music and Opera. Through a combination of lectures and seminars, you will become familiar with fundamental developments in these areas of the repertoire, cementing basic knowledge essential for all trained musicians.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Repertoires II 
   
  
    This core module introduces you to key developments in 19th and 20th-century music. Through a combination of lectures and seminars, you will become familiar with fundamental developments in these areas of the repertoire, cementing basic knowledge essential for all trained musicians.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Ensemble Performance 
   
  
    This module is based upon participation in and preparation for rehearsals and performances of the University Choir and/or Philharmonia. Through intensive preparation of demanding repertoire with a professional conductor, you will develop your understanding of the demands and pleasures of large ensemble performance and knowledge of the repertoire concerned, and be encouraged to reflect upon the roles and responsibilities of individual performers within the group. You will also be required to attend a professional ensemble concert or concerts in the Djanogly Recital Hall, which you will review and on which will prepare a report. Your learning will be assessed through monitoring participation, and by two short written assessments.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Issues in Feminist Philosophy 
   
   
    This module will provide an introduction to some of the issues discussed in contemporary feminist philosophy, considering a range of sometimes opposing feminist views on topics including: pornography, feminine appearance, and gender roles within the family and in the workplace. You will also examine the ways in which feminist writers have shown that matters not traditionally considered political do in fact have political significance. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Western Philosophy 
   
   
    Through considering some of the greatest thinkers who have ever lived, you will become familiar with some of the main philosophical ideas which have shaped western analytical philosophy. You will understand how and why these ideas arose and the context in which they were developed. The thinkers which could be covered include: Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, St Augustine, St Aquinas, and Hume, among others. You will spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Nature of Meaning 
   
  
    The module begins with an exploration of various theories of naming, paying particular attention to the works of Frege, Russell, and Kripke. The module then turns its attention to various puzzles concerning the nature of meaning, including the distinction between analytic and synthetic sentences. In the final part of the module, you will move on to a discussion of some of the mainstream theories of meaning; in particular, a truth-conditional semantics. You will also explore how this might be developed to take into account indexical terms such as ’I’, ’now’, and ’here’. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture and one hour-long seminar. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Music Careers 
   
   
    This module aims to provide you with the knowledge and guidance necessary to achieve success in a range of career paths relevant to Music students. Nottingham alumni representing a wide variety of employment sectors will share their experiences, and the Department of Music and Careers Service staff will provide a range of complementary sessions, addressing both practical skills essential to obtaining employment and a broader understanding of the changing nature of employment markets.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Critical Thinking about Music 
   
   
    This module develops awareness of and interest in a variety of broadly based critical and investigative topics that go beyond the orthodoxies of chronological history and technical/stylistic commentary. The module aim is to enable you to see music not just as a self-sufficient artistic and intellectual tradition but also as an activity that is embedded in social-cultural contexts and informed by your values and attitudes. Important critical issues, embracing ethical and philosophical ideas as they relate to music, as well as a range of aesthetic and interpretive questions, will be addressed in a theoretical and a practical way. You will have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Advanced Ensemble Performance 
   
   
    This module assesses student performance in a small ensemble setting. Weekly  coaching sessions will be given to student ensembles, plus individual instrumental tuition. The module will be assessed through a public ensemble performance, plus involvement in the larger student ensembles.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Skills in Composition 
   
   
    This module develops key skills in composition as a necessary basis for undertaking later composition modules. The module explores the creative potential of present-day orchestral instruments and the specific notational requirements of contemporary composition. The relationship between full-score and instrumental part is also illuminated. You will receive weekly classes amounting to 3.5 hours contact time per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Digital Composition 
   
   
    This module develops core skills in professional digital composition, using Logic Pro software. Topics addressed will include the analysis and study of different examples of digital composition techniques, and the completion of industry-specific composition briefs. The aim is to provide a basic grounding in computer based music composition and industry standard software. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Performance II 
   
   
    This module offers opportunity for intensive development of performing skills. You will receive regular individual lessons with your assigned performance tutor, with whom you agree a corpus of works to be studied. Individual lessons are complemented by regular performance workshops. Your end of year recital will usually include items selected from the appropriate syllabus of the ABRSM, Trinity or Rockschool.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Work Placement 
   
   
    This module involves part-time placement (1 day a week) in an external organisation, and is aimed at developing hands-on work experience and employability skills in a workplace relevant to Music graduates. Each placement will be arranged by the Department, and will be provided by organisations involved in music or other areas of the creative and cultural industries. Departmental mentoring will take the form of a fortnightly seminar, where experiences are shared and work is undertaken on the  assessment tasks.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Approaches to Popular Music 
   
  
    This module aims to provide a grounding in approaches to thinking and writing about popular music, with some theoretical and musicological background in musical, historical and cultural issues. It will cover a variety of general approaches and perspectives, as well as exploring key issues in relation to featured songs, videos, and case studies. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Jazz: Origins and Styles 
   
  
    This module investigates the origins of jazz in ragtime and the blues, and the development of contrasting jazz styles from 1917 to the present day. Topics include: New Orleans and Chicago ensemble jazz; Harlem stride piano; swing bands; be-bop and hard bop; the 'cool' school; modal jazz; free jazz; jazz-rock fusion. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy and Aesthetics of Music 
   
  
    This module introduces the student to the traditions of philosophical reflection on music, dating from Kant to the present day. Students will be encouraged to apply the ideas of key philosophers to a present-day case study. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Aesthetics of Electronic and Computer Music 
   
  
    This module investigates technological shifts in recording and performance and assesses their impact on the perception of music. Students will explore how cultural changes and advances in technology have shaped existing genres and created new movements. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Portfolio of Compositions 
   
  
    This module offers the opportunity to develop compositional expertise and imagination to a high standard. Assessment will include live student performance of an ensemble composition. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Can Classical Music Change Lives? 
   
  
    This module examines projects that have used music to tackle situations of conflict or social disadvantage. Case studies include El Sistema, the West-Eastern Divan Orchestra, Streetwise Opera and Music in Prisons. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Opera and Politics 
   
  
    This module considers political ‘meanings’ embedded in individual operas, and examines ways in which political theories might be related to the aesthetic dimension of opera. Themes include race, nationalism, gender, religion, fascism. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Music in Asia 
   
  
    This module examines musical traditions throughout Asia, with an emphasis upon the different functions played by musical practice in different cultural contexts. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Film Music 
   
  
    This module provides an introduction to the various styles of film music developed during the history of cinema. Topics include silent film, the golden era of Hollywood, genre characteristics (eg, animation, musical comedy, science fiction etc.), European cinema, and jazz/pop soundtracks. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Beethoven and Schubert 
   
  
    The position of Beethoven and Schubert in music history will be examined from a dual perspective: as a continuation of the maturity of the Classical style and as a point of departure for the Romantic era. Their respective biographies will be studied, both psychologically and professionally, in relation to the musical life of the times and their individual creative trajectories. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Narrative and Emotion 
   
  
    This module examines ways in which visual artists and composers tell stories and convey feelings in the period 1600-1750. Topics will include: the portrayal and projection of character, the delineation of emotion, the development of plot and action, the build-up of situations and the relation of these to the narrative sequence. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Twentieth-Century Studies 
   
  
    This module examines aspects of style and structure in a wide variety of twentieth-century classical music. Topics to be considered include post-tonal harmony, serial thought, block form, minimalism and new concepts of rhythm and texture. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Approaches to Music Therapy 
   
  
    This module considers both the history and the present day practice of therapeutic uses of music. The intention is to give a students a grounding in the basic theories of music therapy, and an appreciation of the range of music’s use in different contexts. You will have weekly class contact time of 3.5 hours. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Political Philosophy 
   
  
    This module combines consideration of the political philosophy of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and JS Mill with related themes in contemporary debates. The module is designed to introduce you to each of the thinkers and then to consider how related issues are treated by contemporary writers. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy of Mind 
   
  
    This module aims to introduce you to some of the major issues within contemporary philosophy of mind. We will examine four topics and the interactions between them: intentionality, consciousness, mental causation and the status of physicalism. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Epistemology 
   
  
    This module explores contemporary treatments of issues pertaining to knowledge and the justification of belief. It addresses issues such as the following: the structure of justification and its relation to one's mental states and evidence; the justification of induction; the notion of a priori justification and the relation between your evidence and what you know, among others. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Normative Ethics 
   
  
    You will gain an in-depth understanding of the main positions in contemporary normative ethics: their variations, strengths, weaknesses and historical precedents. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
    Optional  
  
    Collaborative Project 
   
   
    This module involves student performers, composers and music technologists working together to develop a new creative project, for performance in a venue in Nottingham. Improvisation will be fundamental to the developmental stages of the project. Guidance will be given through weekly workshops.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Performance III 
   
   
    Building on previous performance modules, you will develop your performing skills to a professional standard. You will receive regular individual lessons with your assigned performance tutor, with whom you agree a corpus of works to be studied. Individual lessons are supplemented with regular performance workshops. The recital should usually include items selected from the appropriate syllabus of the ABRSM, Trinity or Rockschool.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Composition Project 
   
   
    This module offers the opportunity to develop creative ability and technical skill in composition to an advanced level. Individuality of compositional voice is encouraged in a project or programme of projects agreed between yourself and the module tutor. You will have weekly contact time of 3 hours.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Music Production 
   
   
    This module investigates current production processes within historical contexts; explores communication of artistic expression via musical direction and arrangements, and factors affecting performance; develops communication and time management skills in working with artists; and skills in effective digital file management. You will have weekly contact time of 3 hours.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Dissertation 
   
   
    This module provides you with the opportunity to prepare for an extended individual prose study of 11,000-13,000 words, on a self-selected subject, agreed with the module convener. Credit will be given for the scope and depth of the study, for clarity of expression and thoroughness of presentation. One-to-one supervision will be supplemented by regular group classes and attendance at Department Music Colloquia.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Seminars 
   
   
    Every year a number of research seminars are offered in subjects directly relating to staff research interests. In the next two years these will be on Britten and Sondheim, Music and Minorities, Musicians’ Health, Music in Historic Cities, and The Romantic Imagination. Teaching is in small groups, with weekly contact time of 3 hours.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Contemporary Meta-Ethics 
   
   
    This module will take a detailed look at the main arguments and themes in contemporary meta-ethics. It will trace the development of contemporary debates in meta-ethics from their beginnings in the work of G E Moore up to the most recent arguments between naturalism and non-naturalism, cognitivism and non-cognitivism. You will have a two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy of Art 
   
  
    This module aims to promote a deeper understanding of philosophical issues pertaining to art. By the end of the module, you should be able to discuss and evaluate different views of the expressive power of art, to explain certain current view on expression and representation, and to present the main contemporary viewpoints pertaining to the nature of artworks. You will have a two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar each week. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Marx 
   
  
    In this module you will be introduced to the theories of Karl Marx through selected texts from his works. Topics covers will include alienation, the material conception of history, the labour theory of value and French political theory among others. You will gain an understanding of concepts essential for advanced study on this course. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Distributive Justice 
   
  
    This module will take a detailed look at one of the main topics of contemporary analytical political philosophy: the theory of distributive justice. This theory attempts to specify abstractly the conditions under which a distribution of benefits and burdens amongst a group of persons would be just. You will consider challenges to the legitimacy of any redistributive principle, and attempts to accommodate values such as responsibility and choice in different patterns of distribution. You will have a two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar each week. 
       
   
  
      
   
      
   Many Year Two modules are also available at Year Three.