Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.   
  
  Typical Year One Modules 
  
  
   Students choose a three subject pathway, 40 credits of each subject are studied in the first year. The majority of the modules are compulsory but there are limited optional choices. Depending you your chosen pathway, your modules will differ. For examples of typical modules offered by each department, click on the links below.    
   
   Archaeology 
   
  
    For more information about Archaeology modules click 
   here 
   
   
    
   
   
   Biological Sciences 
   
  
    For more information about Biological Sciences modules click 
   here 
   
   
    
   
   
   Chemistry 
   
  
    For more information about Chemistry modules click 
   here 
   
   
    
   
   
   Environmental Science 
   
  
    For more information about Environmental Science modules click 
   here 
   
   
    
   
   
   Geography 
   
  
    For more information about Geography modules click 
   here 
   
   
    
   
   
   Mathematics 
   
  
    For more information about Mathematics modules click 
   here 
   
   
    
   
   
   Physics 
   
  
    For more information about Physics modules click 
   here 
   
   
    
   
   
   Psychology 
   
  
    For more information about Psychology modules click 
   here 
   
   For details of the specific modules by pathway, please visit the 
  Natural Sciences website.   
  
 
     
  
     
  
  Typical Year Two Modules 
  
  
  
    Students continue with any 
   two of their first year subjects. Each subject is studied in greater depth, with many subjects allowing students to tailor their studies through optional modules. Students take 60 credits of modules from each subject and find that there is a greater emphasis on study outside of formal classes. 
   
   
    
   For more detailed module information in each subject, 
  please visit the Natural Sciences website.
   
  
 
     
  
     
  
  Typical Year Three Modules 
  
  
   Students continue with the same two subjects studied in the second year taking a further 60 credits of each. The modules available in the third year become more advanced and students are allowed greater flexibility through optional modules which focus on specialist areas within the subject.  
   For more detailed module information in each subject, please visit the Natural Sciences website.