Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
  
    Essential Genes, Molecules and Cells (40 credits)
    
   
   
    This module combines lectures and laboratory classes aims to introduce you to the structure and function of significant molecules in cells, and the important metabolic processes which occur inside them. You will study, amongst other topics, protein and enzyme structure and function, the biosynthesis of cell components, and the role of cell membranes in barrier and transport processes. You'll examine how information in DNA is used to determine the structure of gene products. Topics include DNA structure, transcription and translation and mutation and recombinant DNA technology.    
   
  
      
   
   
    Essential Skills in Neuroscience (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module focuses on developing the core skills needed by neuroscientists in scientific writing, data handling and analysis, experimental design and scientific presentations. Alongside lectures and workshops, small-group tutorials are an important component of this module. In these tutorials, you get to know the member of staff who will be your tutor for the duration of your studies, discuss scientific topics relevant to your degree, and practice key skills such as essay-writing and data-handling.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamentals of Neuroscience (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module will give you a good grounding in the basic principles of the nervous system of humans and other animals. Topics will include neuroanatomy, cellular neuroscience, neuropharmacology, sensory systems, neuroendocrinology, memory, behavioural neuroscience and diseases of the nervous system. These will be delivered through weekly lectures and practical classes  
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Physiology (20 credits)  
   
   
    In this module, you will be introduced to the physiology of the major systems e.g. cardiovascular, nervous, musculo-skeletal mostly in in man, including some aspects of drug action. This module includes lectures and laboratory classes.  
   
  
      
   
   Optional Modules (20 credits)  
   You must choose 20 credits of additional modules. These can either be from within the School of Life Sciences or from other Schools in the University. Options from within the School of Life Sciences are as follows:  
   
    Life on Earth (20 credits)  
   
   
    Life on Earth provides an introduction to the fundamental characteristics and properties of the myriad of organisms which inhabit our planet, from viruses, bacteria and Archaea, to plants and animals. In weekly lectures, and regular laboratory practical classes, you will consider how living organisms are classified, how they are related genetically and phylogenetically, and basic aspects of their structure and function.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Evolution, Ecology and Behaviour (20 credits)  
   
   
    Starting with Darwin’s theory of evolution, you will learn how natural selection and other evolutionary forces have shaped the ways in which organisms interact with each other and their environment. In addition to lectures, practical classes will give you hands on experience with a range of ecological and behavioural concepts in the laboratory and the field.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Chemistry for Life (20 credits)  
   
   
    To help you understand the chemical underpinnings of biochemistry you will study some essential chemistry in year 1 in lecture based modules which include interpretation of the periodic table, atomic properties, electron configuration, periodicity, structure and bonding, symmetry, coordination complexes and their properties), which underpins much of the study of chemistry. You will also develop an understanding of the basics of organic chemistry, including nomenclature, molecular structure and bonding, stereochemistry and the chemical reactivity of common functional groups and reaction types through an understanding of their electronic properties and how these are fundamental to biological reactions.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
  
    Neuronal Signalling
    
   
   
    This module reviews neuronal signalling and information processing, neural networks, and computer modelling. The approach will be based on experimental studies to illustrate basic neurophysiological mechanisms. It will investigate how processing of information by individual nerve cells leads to aspects of integrative neuroscience, and consider how these properties aid our understanding of the neurobiological basis of behaviour. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Basic molecular pharmacology
    
   
   
    This module will cover the basic mechanisms involved in drug action; receptors, signal transduction, cell mediators, drug distribution and delivery, toxicology and genetic factors and will provide a basic understanding of drug action and receptor mechanisms.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    The ageing brain
    
   
   
    This module provides an understanding of brain ageing from both the physiological and behavioural perspectives. You’ll be given an overview of the major evolutionary and physiological theories attempting to explain why and how cells age, centred on research methods used to study ageing. It will illustrate how models, from cellular to whole organism, can help our understanding of brain ageing. Importantly, this module discusses the distinction between normal and pathological ageing.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Behavioural neuroscience
    
   
   
    This module will encourage you to think about the brain in a functional way, and consider what behaviours are associated with particular brain pathologies. The module will review: how we produce and understand language; how we recognise things in our environment; how we commit things to memory and recall them when we need to; how we organise our behaviour; how we control pain and emotions and how and why we sleep.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Neuroendocrinology
    
   
   
    This module will examine the structure and function of hypothalamic and neuroendocrine systems which regulate physiology and behaviour and thereby control growth, reproduction, metabolism, energy intake and expenditure, and biological rhythms. The module also covers the important role of hormones in feedback control systems of the central nervous system and the behavioural consequences of the release of these hormones.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Autonomic Neurophysiology and Neuropharmacology
    
   
   
    This module will examine the physiology and pharmacology of the autonomic and other peripheral nervous systems including neuropeptides; co-existence of neurotransmitters; purines and the effect of drugs on the salivary glands; smooth, skeletal and cardiac muscle; gastrointestinal and cardiovascular systems; and the eye. It will also consider mechanisms by which the autonomic nervous system controls peripheral functions in synergism with hormonal mechanisms.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular and Developmental Biology
    
   
   
    This module will consider how the brain develops and connects, how the connections function, are maintained and repaired, how information is stored in the form of memory, and how our knowledge of neurobiology can be applied. This module involves spending 3 hours per week within practicals and having a 3 hour lecture once per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Final Year Modules  
  
  
  
    Neuroscience Research Project
    
   
   
    The research project is a year-long module. Preparatory work including a literature review and familiarisation with laboratory techniques and protocols occurs in the Autumn semester, with the bulk of the practical work in the Spring semester. You will choose the topic of your project from a list of suggestions and will finalise the experimental plan this after consultation with your supervisor. Each project will involve collection of data by means such as experiment, questionnaire or observation, as well as the analysis and interpretation of the data in the context of previous work. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Clinical neuroscience
    
   
   
    This module is concerned with gaining detailed understanding and interpretation of clinically relevant information and diagnostic data used in the assessment of physiological and psychological function of the peripheral and central nervous systems in the normal individual and in disease. The module will also be concerned with the assessment of drug action in humans and the design and planning of drug trials of new drugs developed for the treatment of neurodegenerative and psychiatric disease.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Communicating neuroscience
    
   
   
    This module will instill an appreciation of current and future directions of research in neuroscience, and develop skills in communication of science. You will use current scientific papers from major neuroscience journals to practice and develop skills in reviewing scientific articles, and in formulating and researching questions and producing written and oral presentations, as well as working as part of a team.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular aspects of brain disease
    
   
   
    This module will develop an understanding of the present state of knowledge of the genetics and molecular aspects of central nervous system diseases with full discussion of the practical and ethical implications of the new genetic information. The module will concentrate on gene mapping techniques and molecular biology, and how these improve understanding of the molecular basis of neuronal cell death, autoimmune disease, and neuronal dysfunction in mental illness.  The disorders to be considered will include schizophrenia, Alzheimer’s, multiple sclerosis, stroke and trauma.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience
    
   
   
    This module will consider ion channels at the molecular level, with topics including the structure and function of different ion channel groups and their modulation by drugs, pesticides and natural toxins. You’ll also consider the synthesis and transport of neurotransmitters and the formation and release of synaptic vesicles. This module involves one three-hour session per week incorporating eight lectures and two practicals.    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Optional Modules  
  
  
  
    Cognitive Psychology
    
   
   
    This module will study mental processes, including the ways in which we gain information from the world, how that information is represented and transformed as knowledge, how it is sorted and how it is used to direct our attention and behaviour. This is our ability to perceive, comprehend, attend, store and retrieve information gained from the world. You’ll have 2 hours of lectures per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Psychology of addiction
    
   
   
    The aim of the module is to provide a broad understanding of the behavioural and biological mechanisms underlying drug and behavioural addictions. The three key aims of the course are to introduce popular drugs of abuse, to compare disruptive behavioural addictions, and to identify common themes of addiction and the underlying mechanisms.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Microbiology
    
   
   
    This module provides an introduction to the basic biology and genetics of micro-organisms, their impact on human health and the environment, and their use in biotechnology. You will spend around 3 hours per week in lectures and 3 hours per week in laboratory practicals.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Genetics ecology and evolution
    
   
   
    This module considers the genetics, evolution, and ecology of living organisms, extending from the basics of genetics, through evolutionary genetics and molecular evolution, to behaviour and population and community ecology. Around 3 hours per week will be spent within lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Neuropsychology and applied neuroimaging
    
   
   
    This course examines the deficits seen in individuals who have suffered brain damage. Students will learn about the impairments of language, memory, perception, attention, motor control, executive control and emotion. This course evaluates both the clinical and theoretical aspects of these syndromes. In particular, this course will evaluate the implications regarding how the healthy brain functions.