Modules  
  Our modules provide a balance of nursing theory and practical application via placements and are delivered in 15 week blocks. Modules are guided by the Nursing and Midwifery Council's (NMC) policies and procedures. On completion of all eight modules, students will be eligable to register as a qualified nurse (Adult) with the NMC.  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules
   
   
  
  
   
   Foundations for Professional and Personal Effectiveness in Nursing 
   
   
   This module provides students with the opportunity to explore the foundations of health and illness within the context of their developing professional role. Students will have the opportunity to develop knowledge, values and skills that place the individual at the centre of health care delivery and which are required for the safe delivery of care in a variety of settings. Learning will be primarily enquiry-based but also in the form of workshops, seminars and lectures.   
   
  
      
   
   
   Diverse Perspectives on Care Assessment, Planning, Delivery and Decision Making for Nursing Practice 
   
   
   This module gives the opportunity to experience health from the perspective of the individual and their carer. You will consider factors in infection control, self-management, communication, the impact of health on the family unit and assessment, re-integration and social inclusion.   
   
  
      
   
   
   The Social Context of Health Care Provision and Delivery 
   
   
   This module provides students with the opportunity to critically evaluate the role and practice of the nurse in a variety of settings. This includes further development of knowledge and skills in applying and evaluating appropriate and relevant nursing care and provides students with an understanding of health determinants, health inequalities and the development of skills in health promotion. You will be helping care givers by promoting independence and rehabilitation. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Research Proposal (Research 1) 
   
   
   This module will improve your confidence when undertaking research so that you will be more prepared for the dissertation. You will select a specific topic with the approval of your tutor and critically evaluate relevant literature to support your studies. In addition you will use qualitative and quantitative study techniques while considering ethical concerns during your research.   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Two Modules
   
   
  
  
   
    
    Complex Care Delivery and Decision Making for  
    Nursing Practice 
    
   
   
   This module gives you the chance to consolidate knowledge and the skills needed to deliver care to individuals. You will consider the evaluation and implementation of care in complex scenarios and analyse their practice in terms of ethical and legal responsibilities. You will learn through a number of lectures, workshops, discussions and seminars to develop your skills.   
   
  
      
   
   
    
    Adult Field Complex Care Delivery and Decision  
    Making for Nursing Practice 
    
   
   
   This module will give you the chance to consolidate knowledge and skills needed in a variety of complex adult settings. You will consider emergency care, specialist environments and the planning and decision making needed to deliver care effectively. You will work in areas of psychology and biology to deliver treatment to Adults and take into account the application of interventions to prevent health issues. You will learn through a number of lectures, workshops, discussions and seminars to develop your skills.   
   
  
      
   
   
    
    Professional Development, Leadership and Innovation 
    for Nursing Practice  
    
   
   
   This module provides students with the opportunity to develop the capacity to organise and evaluate care and the management of individuals and/or groups in order to deliver high quality holistic care. You will also consider the best innovations necessary to offer the best practice and service delivery. There will be lectures, workshops and seminars to help you progress.   
   
  
      
   
   
   Research Dissertation 
   
   
   In this module you will complete an empirical or literature based research discussion. You will give in-depth critical analysis of relevant literature and analyse different findings. In addition you will discuss the implications in your findings and offer recommendations for nursing practice. Finally you will contribute to the existing knowledge and evidence base for nursing knowledge and practice through effective written and verbal communication, effectively disseminating conclusions to a range of audiences.