Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by research for this curriculum development and supported by our highly qualified, enthusiastic and knowledgeable staff.  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules
   
   
  
  
   
   
     Personal and Professional Effectiveness for Nursing 
    Practice (Level 1) 
    
   
   
   
     This module gives you the opportunity to explore nursing in a professional context while also developing your understanding of different theories. You will be given insights into ethical practices and safeguarding in care delivery which will further enhance your confidence in real situations. The aims of this module are to ultimately teach you the roles and responsibilities of becoming a nurse. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Communication, Innovation and Leadership (Level 1) 
   
  
    This module introduces principles of communication for nursing practice with links into innovation and leadership. You will be given innovative solutions to care delivery, leadership skills in healthcare and the chance to apply communication models effectively into practice. In addition you will gain an overall understanding of the relationship between nurses and the public which will prepare you for the future. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Person Centred Nursing Practice: Foundations (Level 1) 
   
  
    This module teaches you the skills needed for nursing assessment, decision making, care delivery and management. You will be given an introduction into human physiology, genetics and development, clinical skills for nursing practice and an introduction to pharmacology for medicines administration. By the end of the module you will be able to confidently describe the nurse’s role within the healthcare system.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules
   
   
  
  
   
   
     Personal and Professional Effectiveness for Nursing Practice (Level 2) 
    
   
  
    In this module you will cover the professional, legal and ethical issues you might encounter in nursing. Concepts of accountability and decision making will be analysed as you access complex care placements. You will consider health choices in relation to contemporary law to achieve a solid understanding of current nursing practices.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Innovation, Communication and Leadership (Level 2) 
   
   
    
    Building on the communication skills developed in Communication, Innovation, Leadership (Year One), you will continue to explore a variety of communicative approaches, including facing challenging behaviour, framing problems effectively, and applying models of communication appropriate to the client group. You will develop an awareness of your own limitations, and those of others, and consider strategies of action. Once more, there is an emphasis on shared reflection to your practice.  
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Person Centred Nursing Care: Delivery and Decision Making (Level 2) 
   
  
    This module enhances the skills and knowledge required for nursing assessment, decision making, care delivery and management. It integrates the theoretical knowledge and understanding required into the professional body requirements for nursing care delivery. The aim is to enhance student skills and knowledge for the delivery of safe, effective and high quality person centred nursing care as they experience more complex health and social care practice scenarios. Integration to professional body requirements will be central to this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
  
    Personal and Professional Effectiveness for Nursing Practice (Level 3) 
   
  
    In this module you will be given the opportunity to evaluate your skills through research practice and application of evidence to your nursing practice which will help you on your leadership role placements. In addition a key part of this module will be dissertation preparation through tutorial support. You will be building upon your knowledge from previous years in ethical, professional and legal concerns.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Leadership, Innovation and Communication (Level 3) 
   
  
    This module introduces the principles of communication for nurses, with links to innovation and leadership. You will learn and apply models of communication, develop your leadership skills, and be encouraged to find innovative solutions in your delivery of care. You will understand the importance of confidentiality, show an awareness of potential language barriers, and consider policy/ best practice in relation to breaking bad news. The module is delivered through a mixture of practical sessions supplemented by E-learning resources, and a student forum where you will be invited to reflect on your practice.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Person Centred Nursing Care: leadership and management (Level 3) 
   
  
    This module consolidates the skills and knowledge required for assessment, decision making, care delivery and care management. It integrates the critical theoretical knowledge and understanding required into the professional body requirements for nursing care delivery at the point of registration. The aim is to provide students with an opportunity to consolidate their skills and develop critical knowledge to facilitate the leadership and management of high quality person centred nursing care in preparation for their role as a Registered Nurse.