Modules  
  Modules may change from year to year. Below are typical examples.  
  There are few optional modules available on this course.   
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Introduction to Dietetics  
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to develop the underpinning knowledge of the nutrient composition of food, the principles of healthy lifestyle guidance and develop the skills to apply this knowledge to different population groups and other essential skills for dietetic practice. You’ll have a maximum of eight hours contact time per week.
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Nutrition 
   
   
   
     Nutrients are vital to humans and animals, but how do they work? In this module you’ll be given a comprehensive introduction to the key concepts in the field of nutrition, including macronutrients, energy metabolism, vitamins and minerals. Depending on your interest, you’ll be able to focus on human or animal nutrition. This means you can choose to look at the role of nutrition in human disease (including coronary heart disease, cancer, obesity and diabetes), or learn about animal nutrition and what it means for food production. You’ll learn about nutrition through a mix of lectures, practical sessions and e-learning.
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Biosciences and Global Food Security 
   
   
   
     How can you use science to help improve global food security? This module introduces you to the issues of global food security and the complexity existing in different parts of our food generation system. Looking across the food supply chain, you’ll cover the evolution of crops, crop and animal production, and the food industry. Importantly, you’ll also look at sustainable nutrition because food security isn’t just about supply – it’s important that people are getting the right kind of food. You’ll learn about these issues through a mix of lectures and practical laboratory sessions. You’ll also develop professional skills to work safely in laboratory situations.  
    
   
       
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemistry – The Building Blocks of Life 
   
   
   
     Have you ever wondered how some crops can resist diseases? This module provides you with the fundamentals for understanding biochemical processes in living organisms. You’ll be introduced to the basic structure, properties and functions of the four key biological macromolecules: nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates and lipids. You’ll also look at the metabolic pathways occurring in cells, such as respiration, photosynthesis and the biosynthetic pathways for the key macromolecules. In addition to lectures, you’ll have practical laboratory sessions to learn how to use key biochemical techniques for the separation and analysis of macromolecules and measurement of the metabolic process. 
     
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Genes and Cells 1 
   
   
   
     The basic functional units of life are cells. In this module you’ll learn about the growth and development of cells, focusing on mitosis, meiosis, cell division and differentiation. You’ll get to explore the ultrastructure – the structure of a cell too small to be seen with an ordinary microscope – of animal, plant and bacterial cells and even viruses. Once you have this foundation understanding, the second part of the module covers fundamental genetic principles and you’ll be able to answer the questions: What are the Mendelian laws of inheritance? How are genes expressed? You’ll have lectures from current researchers in the field and the opportunity to apply your learning in the laboratory and in workshops. 
    
   
       
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Physiology 
   
   
   
     This module introduces and explains the major physiological systems which are essential for life: the central nervous system, the respiratory system, the cardiovascular system, the renal system and the digestive system. You’ll understand the structures and functions of the major organs and the functions of individual cell types. The module will cover animal functions including their reactions to the internal and external environments, reproduction and development. You’ll have weekly lectures and one practical class.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Health Behaviours 
   
   
   
     This module develops your application of nutritional science in relation to the general population. You’ll investigate food composition, nutritional requirements and recommended dietary intakes before looking at methods of measuring food intake. Basic psychology and sociology concepts will be introduced to help investigate social, economic and cultural factors that influence food choices before examining concepts of health and maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Theories of health education and promotion and how these relate to influencing health behaviour will be covered. You’ll have weekly lectures (4 hours each) and workshops (4 hours each). 
    
   
       
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Academic Development and Employability 
   
   
   
     In this module you will develop the academic and professional skills you need for your further studies and future career. Through small group work within tutor groups, you’ll become well-equipped in areas such as essay-writing, presentational skills (oral and written), critical interpretation of published materials, and other universal skills that will benefit you throughout your degree and into the future. 
    
   
       
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Clinical Placement 
   
   
   
     Four-week placement experience in the summer vacation. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Principles of Immunology 
   
   
   
     What are the main events of the immune response when the body is infected by intra and extracellular parasites, essential components of many diseases? In this module you’ll be introduced to the fundamental concepts behind cellular and molecular immunology. You’ll learn about the main characteristics and features of the innate and adaptive immune system, their functions and how they relate to each other. You’ll explore current immune-techniques, modern concepts of immune-deficiency and hypersensitivities, and contemporary topics in animal and human diseases. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Nutrition, Metabolism and Disease 
   
   
   
     This module, in lectures and practical sessions, provides a basic understanding of the role of nutrition in a variety of physiological and pathological situations. It aims to emphasise the interaction between the disciplines of biochemistry and nutrition. For example, you will cover the major factors associated with the metabolism of macronutrients during normal (healthy) metabolism and the changes in macronutrient metabolism associated with common chronic diseases like obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular disease.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Food Composition for Dietetics 
   
   
   
     This module covers aspects of food provision for a variety of groups and settings in the UK, including menu planning, costing, recipe analysis and food labelling. You will become more familiar with the composition of foods, exchange systems and what happens to the nutritional value of foods during processes such as storage and cooking. As well as lectures you will have practical sessions using case studies where you will calculate nutritional requirements and adapt intakes to meet the nutritional needs of individuals. Other aspects such as institutional catering, food additives, labelling, health claims and new product development will be discussed. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Medicine and Pathology 
   
   
   
     This module will introduce you to the principles of disease aetiology and diagnosis and to consider the pathophysiological consequences of common diseases likely to be seen in clinical practice by qualified dietitians. You’ll also be introduced to history taking, clinical chemistry based assessments, nasogastric intubation and venepuncture, and will also practice the basic aspects of life support, and measurement of BP.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Communication Skills & Educational Methods 
   
   
   
     This module provides insight into formal and informal methods for both written and verbal communication. Educational and learning theories will be taught and you’ll be introduced to basic counselling skills and provided with the opportunity to practice such skills within a dietetics setting. You’ll have a maximum of 4 hours contact time per week to study for this module.
     
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Nutritional Regulation, Physiology and Endocrinology  
   
  
    This module aims to develop your understanding of the principles of nutrition from dietary assessment and food analysis through to how the body utilises the diet’s nutrients in energetics throughout the human lifespan and in different pathological states. You will investigate the physiological systems that control homeostasis and metabolism as well as examining how the body regulates various physiological responses to food, regulating appetite and energy expenditure. You will have two lectures and workshops per week for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Global Issues in Nutrition  
   
  
    Throughout this module your problem solving skills will be developed whilst increasing your knowledge on key topics in nutrition such as global food security and tackling the obesity epidemic. Lectures from different academic staff will introduce the case study topic to be investigated. Working in groups, you will gather relevant information from various research sources, synthesise data and present in appropriate formats. As well as developing skills and knowledge essential for working in the professional sector, students will be expected to use knowledge being delivered in other modules to apply to the set case studies. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Fundamentals of Dietetics 
   
  
    This module aims to add to the knowledge you have already gained in year one, whilst developing the skills that are fundamental to dietetic practice. The module considers the dietetic care process and how this defines the actions, critical thinking and specialist skills that form the components of a dietetic intervention. Students will become more familiar with the variety of techniques that can be used to assess dietary intake and to measure anthropometry, and will consider the lifestyle and social factors that may pose barriers to healthy eating. Using case study based teaching, students will be able to apply their knowledge of dietetic assessment and adapt their recommendations to meet the needs of individuals. Other aspects such as genetics in healthcare and user and carer involvement will be discussed. You will study via weekly lectures and some seminars and workshops. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Nutrition and the Health of Populations 
   
   
   
     This module will introduce you to the basic methodology used to explore relationships between diet, health and disease in human populations. An appreciation of these techniques will be used as the basis for in-depth exploration of current major public health priorities. The module will take a lifecourse approach to explain and develop the concepts of human health and disease as affected by diet, dietary components and interacting factors. You’ll have a weekly four hour lecture to study for this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Clinical Pharmacology 
   
   
   
     You’ll be given an overview of clinical pharmacology, with particular emphasis on route of delivery of drug and principal aspects of pharmacokenetics, including factors influencing drug absorption, distribution, metabolism and elimination. The use of drugs in the treatment of diseases for which there is a dietetic input to the management, and the possibility of drug-nutrient interactions in these, and other, patients will be covered. Activities consist of lectures, private study work on clinical case studies and a review and feedback session. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Changing Behaviour, Promoting Health 
   
   
   
     Unhealthy ‘lifestyle’ behaviours such as poor nutrition, physical inactivity and smoking are major contributors to the burden of disease. This course is designed to explore the process of changing these behaviours to improve health, using examples from behavioural science, health education, and health promotion. You’ll be introduced to fundamental concepts from sociology and their contribution to the understanding of health behaviour. You’ll look at health education strategies used in the UK, and make some comparisons with programmes from other countries. This is a highly interactive module. You’ll be expected to contribute to in-class discussions and work in groups on an assignment as well as taking lectures and self-directed online learning.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Principles and Practice of Dietetics 
   
   
   
     This module aims to link the underpinning science of nutrition developed over the first two years of the programme to the applied practice of dietetics. This will consider both the professional aspects of dietetics alongside the theory of the nutritional management of disease in individuals and populations. This will prepare you to start your 12 week clinical placement.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Skills in Dietetics 
   
   
   
     This module covers the theoretical and practical aspects of commonly used research methods. It includes hands-on experience of statistical packages and laboratory skills, provides information on systematic reviews, practical and audit based projects, and an understanding of the ethical nature of research. This is preparatory study for your dietetics research project. You’ll have weekly lectures, laboratory and workshop sessions. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Clinical Placement 
   
   
   
     12-week clinical placement in the summer vacation. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Dietetics Research Project 
   
   
    In this module you will carry out original research at the forefront of human nutrition and dietetics in collaboration with members of staff.  
    The Research Project encourages critical thinking and involves both independent and teamwork, a literature survey, and data handling, analysis and interpretation.   
    Our close links with the University's Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences and local dietetic departments mean that Research Projects directly related to nutrition and human health are available. Alternatively, the strong research standing of the School means that laboratory-based projects using state-of-the-art facilities are also on offer.  Recent research projects include:  
    
     Compliance to dietary advice in diabetes mellitus Type 2  
     Processed food intake in pre-school children  
     The relationship between breastfeeding and allergy: a systematic review of the literature   
    
    Students producing the highest quality projects are encouraged to submit abstracts to the British Dietetic Association annual conference and present their work at the conference.  
    Read BURN the Biosciences Undergraduate Research at Nottingham web pages to find out more about undergraduate research projects. BURN is a freely accessible e-journal which showcases final-year research projects undertaken by biosciences students.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Dietetics and Professional Issues 
   
   
   
     This module considers dietary management in specialist areas of advanced dietetic practice including management using individual student learning experiences and small group work. You’ll have a maximum of eight hours contact time per week. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Dietetic Practice - including Clinical Placement 
   
   
   
     Under the supervision of experienced registered dietitians, you’ll gain active experience in areas of health care that are appropriate to support subsequent application for dietetic registration. At the end of the 12-week placement you will have had the opportunity to work with clients/patients in the same way as a newly qualified dietitian.