Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    The Biosciences and Global Food Security 
   
   
    How can you use science to help improve global food security? This module introduces you to the issues of global food security and the complexity existing in different parts of our food generation system. Looking across the food supply chain, you’ll cover the evolution of crops, crop and animal production, and the food industry. Importantly, you’ll also look at sustainable nutrition because food security isn’t just about supply – it’s important that people are getting the right kind of food. You’ll learn about these issues through a mix of lectures and practical laboratory sessions. You’ll also develop professional skills to work safely in laboratory situations.    
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemistry – The Building Blocks of Life 
   
   
   
     Have you ever wondered how some crops can resist diseases? This module provides you with the fundamentals for understanding biochemical processes in living organisms. You’ll be introduced to the basic structure, properties and functions of the four key biological macromolecules: nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates and lipids. You’ll also look at the metabolic pathways occurring in cells, such as respiration, photosynthesis and the biosynthetic pathways for the key macromolecules. In addition to lectures, you’ll have practical laboratory sessions to learn how to use key biochemical techniques for the separation and analysis of macromolecules and measurement of the metabolic process.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Genes and Cells 1 
   
   
   
     The basic functional units of life are cells. In this module you’ll learn about the growth and development of cells, focusing on mitosis, meiosis, cell division and differentiation. You’ll get to explore the ultrastructure – the structure of a cell too small to be seen with an ordinary microscope – of animal, plant and bacterial cells and even viruses. Once you have this foundation understanding, the second part of the module covers fundamental genetic principles and you’ll be able to answer the questions: What are the Mendelian laws of inheritance? How are genes expressed? You’ll have lectures from current researchers in the field and the opportunity to apply your learning in the laboratory and in workshops.  
    
   
       
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Foundation Science 
   
   
   
     A solid understanding of mathematics, physics and chemistry is essential for a scientist. This module will provide you with the foundation knowledge of mathematics and statistics, physics and chemistry needed for your future studies. It compensates for potential gaps in understanding resulting from different prior education. The mathematics and statistics element includes powers and logs, differentiation, significance and regression. The physics element includes energy and heat, light and the electromagnetic spectrum, attenuation/absorption, and radioactivity. The chemistry element includes elements and periodic table; atomic structure and bonding; intermolecular attractions, chemical equilibrium; acids and bases, oxidation and reduction; rates of reaction; and basic organic chemistry, isomerism, and rings. You’ll have lectures from experts in these fields and use computer-aided learning practicals to apply what you’ve learnt. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Nutrition  
   
   
   
     Nutrients are vital to humans and animals, but how do they work? In this module you’ll be given a comprehensive introduction to the key concepts in the field of nutrition, including macronutrients, energy metabolism, vitamins and minerals. Depending on your interest, you’ll be able to focus on human or animal nutrition. This means you can choose to look at the role of nutrition in human disease (including coronary heart disease, cancer, obesity and diabetes), or learn about animal nutrition and what it means for food production. You’ll learn about nutrition through a mix of lectures, practical sessions and e-learning. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Academic Development and Employability 
   
   
   
     In this module you will develop the academic and professional skills you need for your further studies and future career. Through small group work within tutor groups, you’ll become well-equipped in areas such as essay-writing, presentational skills (oral and written), critical interpretation of published materials, and other universal skills that will benefit you throughout your degree and into the future. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Physiology 
   
   
   
     This module introduces and explains the major physiological systems which are essential for life: the central nervous system, the respiratory system, the cardiovascular system, the renal system and the digestive system. You’ll understand the structures and functions of the major organs and the functions of individual cell types. The module will cover animal functions including their reactions to the internal and external environments, reproduction and development. You’ll have weekly lectures and one practical class.   
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Food Commodities and Primary Processing  
   
  
    What is quality and how can it be defined for food commodities? How does a food commodity develop then deteriorate? What methods (chemical, physical or biochemical) can be employed to control quality and slow down deterioration? In this module, you’ll study the major food commodities: cereals, oilseeds/fruits, fruit and vegetables, tea, coffee, cocoa, herbs and spices, sugar, meat, fish, eggs and milk. You’ll look at their chemical composition and the strategies employed to store and/or prepare the material for food manufacturing operations. Each commodity will be dealt with individually but principles that link different commodities will be emphasised. You’ll develop an understanding of the quality of food commodity materials and how they are traded within the global food supply chain and what this means for trade justice. You’ll have a mix of lectures and active learning – where you and your team will lead class discussion about the commodity you have researched.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Food Materials and Ingredients 
   
   
   
     Food materials can be raw, or in the form of manufactured food products. During processing, the material properties of the food are altered; this directly affects the quality of the food product in terms of, for example, its colour, flavour and texture. This module introduces you to properties of these materials (raw and processed), with a particular focus on the chemical and physical nature of carbohydrates, proteins and lipids. You’ll have a weekly four hour lecture supported by three hours of practicals each week to study for this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Health Behaviours 
   
   
   
     This module develops your application of nutritional science in relation to the general population. You’ll investigate food composition, nutritional requirements and recommended dietary intakes before looking at methods of measuring food intake. Basic psychology and sociology concepts will be introduced to help investigate social, economic and cultural factors that influence food choices before examining concepts of health and maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Theories of health education and promotion and how these relate to influencing health behaviour will be covered. You’ll have weekly lectures (4 hours each) and workshops (4 hours each). 
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Nutrition, Metabolism and Disease 
   
   
   
     This module, in lectures and practical sessions, provides a basic understanding of the role of nutrition in a variety of physiological and pathological situations. It aims to emphasise the interaction between the disciplines of biochemistry and nutrition. For example, you will cover the major factors associated with the metabolism of macronutrients during normal (healthy) metabolism and the changes in macronutrient metabolism associated with common chronic diseases like obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Principles of Immunology 
   
   
   
     What are the main events of the immune response when the body is infected by intra and extracellular parasites, essential components of many diseases? In this module you’ll be introduced to the fundamental concepts behind cellular and molecular immunology. You’ll learn about the main characteristics and features of the innate and adaptive immune system, their functions and how they relate to each other. You’ll explore current immune-techniques, modern concepts of immune-deficiency and hypersensitivities, and contemporary topics in animal and human diseases.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Nutritional Regulation, Physiology and Endocrinology  
   
  
    This module, in lectures and practical sessions, provides a basic understanding of the role of nutrition in a variety of physiological and pathological situations. It aims to emphasise the interaction between the disciplines of biochemistry and nutrition. For example, you will cover the major factors associated with the metabolism of macronutrients during normal (healthy) metabolism and the changes in macronutrient metabolism associated with common chronic diseases like obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Global Issues in Nutrition 
   
  
    Throughout this module your problem solving skills will be developed whilst increasing your knowledge on key topics in nutrition such as global food security and tackling the obesity epidemic. Lectures from different academic staff will introduce the case study topic to be investigated. Working in groups, you will gather relevant information from various research sources, synthesise data and present in appropriate formats. As well as developing skills and knowledge essential for working in the professional sector, students will be expected to use knowledge being delivered in other modules to apply to the set case studies.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Professional Skills for Bioscientists 
   
   
    In this module you will develop and consolidate your professional competencies and abilities as a bioscientist. You’ll improve your core professional skills in the scientific method, experimentation, data analysis and measurement techniques that enable you carry out scientifically-sound research in animal, crop or management science. You’ll also cover discipline-specific topics. There will be a mix of lectures, workshops and group activity sessions for you to work on your skills.  
   
  
      
   
   Optional  
  
    Reproductive Physiology 
   
   
   
     Understanding reproduction is important for many different aspects of mammalian health. In this module, you’ll become familiar with the physiology and regulation of male and female mammalian reproduction, the control of avian reproduction and lactational physiology. You’ll look at reproduction in male and female mammals, including physiological control, cyclicity and reproductive efficiency. You’ll also consider the principal features of avian physiology and reproduction in domestic fowl, with an emphasis on the nutritional and metabolic challenges associated with commercial rates of egg lay. Lactational physiology will also be discussed, and you’ll learn about the development of mammary tissue, the biochemistry of milk synthesis, the endocrine control of milk secretion, and the metabolic correlates of lactation in dairy ruminants. You’ll have a mix of lectures and practical laboratory sessions for experimental work and dissection. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Food Safety and Legislation  
   
   
   
     Through weekly lectures and workshops, the aim of this module is to introduce you to the legislation relating to food and enable you to recognise the responsibilities (and liabilities) of those engaged in the production, manufacture and supply of food and related products. This includes the composition, labelling and advertising of food and food products sold for human consumption within the UK and the EU as well as the legislation that impacts on health attributes and claims for consumer products. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Agricultural and Food Marketing  
   
  
    Marketing is a lot bigger than just advertising. In this module, you’ll learn about the importance of a marketing-orientated approach to successful rural and food businesses. A hands-on module, you’ll use an agricultural or food company of your choice as a case study and, in small teams, analyse its market and create your own marketing plan. Guest lectures will be invited so you can learn more about how marketing theory is applied in practice and there will be a field visit to a local farm to see their marketing strategy in action. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Endocrine Control Systems  
   
  
    This module introduces students to the physiology and biochemistry of the mammalian endocrine system and to the endocrine control of homeostasis and metabolism. You will cover a more comprehensive and detailed appreciation of theoretical and applied aspects of endocrinology with lectures and groupwork. For example you will learn about the structure and biochemistry of hormonally active molecules as a tool for understanding endocrine physiology; how the endocrine system regulates calcium and glucose concentrations in the blood; how the central nervous system interacts with the main endocrine axes, and how these axes regulate major physiological and metabolic systems.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Practical Techniques in Human Nutrition  
   
  
    This module provides a fundamental understanding and practical training in a number of the core practical methods utilised in nutritional science. In lectures and practicals it covers the theory and practical skills associated with human nutrition, including collecting and analysing exercise physiology data. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    For your research project you will study a particular aspect of nutrition in depth, working closely with professional researchers on problems of real significance in nutritional sciences, making use of the considerable expertise and facilities available.    
    The project encourages critical thinking and involves both independent and team work, a literature survey, and data handling, analysis and interpretation.   Recent research projects include:  
    
     Differences in knowledge and behaviour in the obese and nonobese  
     Effect of processing on nutrients in tomato juice  
     Dietary intake of saturated fatty acids and tissue fatty acid composition   
    
    Read BURN the Biosciences Undergraduate Research at Nottingham web pages to find out more about undergraduate research projects. BURN is a freely accessible e-journal which showcases final-year research projects undertaken by biosciences students.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Nutrition 
   
   
   
     This module will examine the concept of metabolic control at the gene, cell and tissue level with particular reference to the role of nutrients in regulating this process. Selected processes by which nutrients and hormones act via receptors and their signal transduction pathways to regulate tissue growth and metabolism will be described along with the mechanisms by which nutrients can act directly on the processes controlling gene expression. You’ll have a four hour lecture and four hour practical each week to study for this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Nutrition and the Health of Populations 
   
   
   
     This module will introduce you to the basic methodology used to explore relationships between diet, health and disease in human populations. An appreciation of these techniques will be used as the basis for in-depth exploration of current major public health priorities. The module will take a lifecourse approach to explain and develop the concepts of human health and disease as affected by diet, dietary components and interacting factors. You’ll have a weekly four hour lecture to study for this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Biotechnology in Animal Physiology 
   
   
   
     Through a weekly two hour lecture you will be given an understanding of the structure of the biotechnology industry, of the techniques involved, and of the opportunities offered by biotechnology. You’ll learn about genetic and epigenetic basis of gene regulation, and how this knowledge is used to develop treatments for disease.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Bioethics 1: Animals, Biotechnology and Society 
   
   
   
     Animal-human interactions raise some prominent ethical issues. In this module, you’ll examine the ethical dimensions concerning animal agriculture, modern biotechnologies and research in the biosciences, in relation to both humans and non-human species. You’ll learn about the ethical frameworks used to analyse specific dilemmas raised by the human use of animals. Using specific animal and biotechnology case studies, you’ll interpret the main ethical theories and principles and apply them to the case studies to inform professional decision-making. You’ll have a mix of lectures and seminars to explore these concepts. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Coordinated Physiological Functions 
   
   
   
     How does the brain control behaviour? In this module you’ll examine the physiological basis of integrated behaviours. You’ll cover hypothalamic control of the endocrine system, body temperature, emotion, appetite and their associated behaviours. You’ll have lectures and laboratory sessions, including a significant practical component looking at the integrative aspects of exercise physiology. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Changing Behaviour, Promoting Health 
   
   
   
     Unhealthy ‘lifestyle’ behaviours such as poor nutrition, physical inactivity and smoking are major contributors to the burden of disease. This course is designed to explore the process of changing these behaviours to improve health, using examples from behavioural science, health education, and health promotion. You’ll be introduced to fundamental concepts from sociology and their contribution to the understanding of health behaviour. You’ll look at health education strategies used in the UK, and make some comparisons with programmes from other countries. This is a highly interactive module. You’ll be expected to contribute to in-class discussions and work in groups on an assignment as well as taking lectures and self-directed online learning. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Microflora of Foods 
   
   
   
     You’ll be given an understanding of: the micro-organisms which are important in foods; the factors which control the development of the microflora of food products and the methods which can be used to isolate and identify bacteria from food products. You’ll spend one day per week in lectures studying for this module. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Biomolecular Data and Networks 
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to familiarize you with the experimental sources of biomolecular data, databases for such data and their interactions and the mathematical and computational ideas behind their visualization and network generation. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and practicals studying for this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Reproduction and Fertility 
   
   
   
     Drawing on your knowledge from earlier modules, the Reproduction and Fertility module is advanced study into fertility regulation and manipulation in mammals. You’ll learn about the artificial control of reproductive cycles in the female and mechanisms involved in pregnancy recognition and maintenance. You’ll explore recent developments in reproductive technology and embryology as it applies to farm species, humans and endangered species. You’ll have lectures and laboratory practical sessions to apply your learning. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Systems Neurophysiology 
   
   
   
     How does the central nervous system sense the environment and react to it? In this module, you’ll learn about central nervous control of sensory and motor pathways and how these systems interact. In particular, you’ll examine the anatomy, physiology and pharmacology of sensory and motor systems and their integration in posture, coordinated movement and protective reflex responses. A strong emphasis will be on the physiology and pharmacology of acute and chronic pain and you’ll study the use of analgesics to treat these conditions. You’ll also gain understanding of the methodology behind a number of neuroscientific techniques and their application in novel research. You’ll have a mix of lectures, computer-based learning and practical laboratory sessions to reinforce and apply your knowledge. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Epigenetics and Development 
   
   
   
     This module introduces current concepts of molecular mechanisms in animal development. A goal is to convey how developmental programs are remarkably conserved among species, including humans. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and have a four hour practical to aide your learning during this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Bioethics 2: Sustainable Food Production, Biotechnology and the Environment 
   
   
   
     Building on Applied Bioethics 1, you’ll investigate widely accepted ethical principles and apply your insights to contemporary ethical issues in agricultural, food and environmental sciences. You’ll explore the ethical dimensions of prominent issues raised by the agricultural practices (including the use of biotechnology and GM crops) designed to meet the nutritional needs of the global population. You’ll also learn about how ethical theory can inform professional choices and public policies related to food production and environmental management. You’ll have a mix of lectures, tutorials and team-based exercises to develop a sound understanding of ethical principles.