Modules  
  In addition to the module listed below, in each year of study there is a a professional competencies module. These modules allow us to confirm that key elements of the course have been assessed and passed. In particular, students are required to produce a series of Continuing Professional Development entries, reflecting on their learning experience. This module is a zero credit module however students are required to pass the module each year in order to progress on the course.   
  
   
   Typical Year One modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Being a Pharmacist 
   
   
    This module will help you understand the role that Pharmacists play and understand the responsibilities, role, ethical and legal issues and the way in which this fits into the structure of the health care system.  This will involve a degree of patient involvement whereby you’ll have 15 - 20 minutes in groups of four discussing with a patient about what it’s like to have a long-term illness.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Essential Skills for Pharmacists 
   
   
    As a pharmacist this module will teach you all the essential skills you will need throughout your time spent at university and your career. You’ll be taught the background and practice in the sets of core skills, such as: Communication with the public and the health care team, Pharmacology and therapeutics, and pharmacist checking skills including accuracy and precision. You’ll have weekly lectures, practical classes and workshops.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Dyspepsia 
   
   
    This module is the first of our ‘Drug, Medicine and Patient’ (DMP) modules focusing on a particular disease  in this case, Dyspepsia. You develop an understanding of the states, causes, diseases and associated conditions of the disease and the commonly encountered drugs and medicines used in their treatment. You’ll also develop key study and learning skills, alongside high level inquiry and critical skills. You’ll have a combination of lectures, workshops, e-learning packages, case study workshops and community and hospital placements.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Bacterial and Fungal Infection 
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn to appreciate microbiology and infectious diseases, developing a high level of understanding of some of the key antimicrobial drugs and detailed knowledge of antibiotic prescribing from a Pharmacists perspective. You’ll study a range of bacterial and fungal infections and their common treatments.  For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, practical sessions, e-learning packages, case studies and directed study.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
   Typical Year Two modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Gastrointestinal and Liver Disorders 
   
   
    This modules aims to provide students with an understanding of the anatomy and physiology of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and the structure and function of the liver with respect to metabolism (of nutrients and drugs). You’ll develop an understanding of the role of normal GI bacteria, as well as learning about the pathology of major GI diseases, and the drugs used to treat these. You’ll also find out how these drugs are absorbed by the body, and will be able to identify appropriate types of dosages for specific drugs. You’ll have a combination of workshops, practical lab classes, e-learning packages, case studies and a hospital placement visit.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Asthma, Allergies and Immune Diseases 
   
   
    Amongst the more common disorders encountered by both community and hospital pharmacists are those affecting the respiratory system; asthma & chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder.  This module aims to illustrate molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying these pathological states; how therapeutic intervention is designed to treat these states and how better medicines can be generated for these conditions. Some example topics within the module include: the role of inflammatory cells, the regulation of smooth muscle tone and mucus production as well as delivery systems (inhalers etc). For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, workshops, practical classes and e-learning packages.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cardiovascular 
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn to appreciate the causes and systems of cardiovascular diseases and the commonly used drugs to treat these.  This module will include patient involvement in teaching; patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder will meet with students to aid your understanding of the condition. On completion of this module you’ll be able recommend appropriate treatment, patient counselling and lifestyle advice. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, practical laboratory classes, workshops, e-learning packages, direct learning and case studies.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Renal and Endocrine Disease 
   
   
    This module will provide you with a comprehensive coverage of pharmaceutical-relevant topics relating to renal and endocrine diseases. You’ll gain understanding of the biology of renal and endocrine function, the symptoms of renal and endocrine diseases and the chemistry and mechanism of peptide-based drugs (such as insulin). On completion of this module you’ll have a sound understanding of the treatment and management of renal and endocrine diseases. You’ll have a combination of lectures, laboratory practical classes and case study workshops over the course of this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Sexual Health and Pregnancy 
   
   
    This module aims to make you consider not only the medication, therapies and appropriate treatments surrounding conception, contraception, and pregnancy but also the evolutionary drivers of reproduction and sexual attraction and the ethical and moral dilemmas that you as a pharmacist may face. The topics covered in this module include: the evolutionary basis of sex and aspects of sexually transmitted diseases, the physiological basis of sexual attraction, conception, contraception and infertility (including ethical and moral considerations) and pregnancy - testing and prescribing.  You’ll have a combination of lectures, podcasts, Q&A sessions, presentations, practical lab classes, case study workshops and 4 formative assessments.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Pain 
   
   
    Pharmacists encounter patients experiencing pain every day. This module provides you with the sufficient background scientific knowledge to be able to understand and describe the clinical use of commonly used analgesics and targets novel analgesics. There is an element of patient involvement via workshop sessions where patients will talk to students in small groups. On completion of this module you’ll be able to apply scientific knowledge to basic clinical scenarios. You’ll have a combination of lectures, workshops, e-learning packages, and case studies.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Viral and Parasitic Infections 
   
   
    This module aims to get you thinking about the available treatments for important viral and parasitic diseases. In this module you’ll get to grips with the basic biology of viruses, protozoan and metazoan parasites and gain an understanding of the pathogens and drugs or vaccinations available for treatment. Some of the topics covered include: the benefits of using vaccination, travel medicine, HIV, H5N1 and tropical diseases and the supply, law and ethics surrounding veterinary medicines. For this module you’ll have lectures, practicals & workshops and case study work.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Central Nervous System Disorders 
   
   
    The central nervous system is fundamental to the work of healthcare professional. This module will provide with you with sufficient background scientific information to be able to understand and describe the pathophysiology of CNS disorders and the medicines used to treat them. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, workshops, practical laboratory classes and case study workshops. The module also includes patient involvement in teaching and you’ll meet patient with a history of drug misuse.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cancers 
   
   
    This module addresses issues relevant to the diagnosis and treatment of cancers, and the professional and ethical issues concerning palliative care and the end of life.  In particular, you will be encouraged to think of cancers as a diverse group of genetic diseases which pose unique problems in their diagnosis and management. Examples of a small number of cancer types will be used to illustrate key points which have broader relevance to cancer therapy and beyond. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, workshops, practical lab classes and case studies.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    For this module you’ll be required to engage in contemporary research methods aimed at solving a specific pharmacy-related or biomedical problem. You’ll be required to collect, analyse and interpret data and present this in the form of a poster presentation and research report. The form of project may vary and it may be based on laboratory work, clinical audit, or patient studies. In order to complete this module you’ll have twelve hours of taught sessions in research methods as well as support from a supervisor throughout the semester.  
    Projects are available in a wide range of subject areas. Students can also apply to undertake their project at an overseas provider; we currently have projects available in Malaysia, the USA, Canada, Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore, France, Italy and New Zealand. Project destinations change each year.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Foundation Placement 1 
   
   
    This 60-credit module will be the first of two six-month Pre-Registration placements. The placement will allow you to develop and apply the skills, knowledge and characteristics required to practice as a pharmacist. You will be placed within a community or hospital pharmacy, and will be supervised by a Pre-Registration tutor who will be responsible for supporting your development and assessing your skills.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Future Medicines 
   
   
    This module looks ahead into your career as a pharmacist and considers the way that major changes in treatment are likely to change over the span of your career. This module aims to give you an appreciation of the research breakthroughs in biology and pharmaceutical sciences that are driving the invention of future medicines. On completion of the module you should be able to assess new scientific breakthroughs in terms of their clinical potential.In this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, workshops, e-learning packages and two case studies to work through.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Integrated Pharmaceutical and Patient Care 
   
   
    In these modules you’ll follow patients through a number of care pathways, for example, from pharmacy to GP, through to hospital admission then discharge to a nursing home. Students will develop their problem solving skills and their abilities in application of therapeutics to individual patients with complex medical conditions and multiple medicines use. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, case studies and patient contact as well as workshops and interprofessional cases.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Pharmacy Leadership and Management 
   
   
    This module will see a group of 10 students set up, design a management plan, market and run a simulated pharmacy for the whole year. Actors will visit as patients and customers, prescribers, pharmaceutical company representatives, inspectors and so on.  You may receive phone calls from doctors, nursing homes, patients, etc and may have to do real out of hours practice.  For this module you’ll have ten lectures throughout the year and 1 day a week simulations.   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Five modules   
  
  
    Compulsory  
  
    Foundation Placement 2 
   
   
    This 60-credit module will be the second of your 26-week Pre-Registration placements, which are integrated within the 5-year MPharm course. See Foundation Placement 1 for more details.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Integrated Pharmaceutical and Patient Care 
   
   
    In these modules you’ll follow patients through a number of care pathways, for example, from pharmacy to GP, through to hospital admission then discharge to a nursing home. Students will develop their problem solving skills and their abilities in application of therapeutics to individual patients with complex medical conditions and multiple medicines use. For this module you’ll have a combination of lectures, case studies and patient contact as well as workshops and interprofessional cases  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Drug Discovery 
   
   
    This module aims to provide you with an appreciation of the state-of-the-art in drug discovery by drawing together concepts in chemistry and pharmacology. You will gain an understanding of how advances in quantitative biology, molecular modelling, structural biology, synthetic chemistry and natural product chemistry combine to create new classes of drugs. You’ll be taught through lectures, workshops, e-learning packages and case studies.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Pharmacy Leadership and Management 
   
   
    This module will see a group of 10 students set up, design a management plan, market and run a simulated pharmacy for the whole year. Actors will visit as patients and customers, prescribers, pharmaceutical company representatives, inspectors and so on.  You may receive phone calls from doctors, nursing homes, patients, etc and may have to do real out of hours practice.  For this module you’ll have ten lectures throughout the year and 1 day a week simulations.