Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer. You can also view our undergraduate modules guide (PDF).  
  Please view the Department of Philosophy website for information on their modules.   
  Typical year one modules  
  Core economics modules  
 
   Foundations of Macroeconomics 
  
  
   Macroeconomics is the study of the aggregate economy. This module will focus on the determinants of aggregate output, both in the short run - addressing cyclical movements of booms and busts - and in the long run - providing an introduction to economic growth.  
   A running theme will be debates over the role of the government in macroeconomic management, covering fiscal and monetary policy. The module will introduce a series of basic models used in modern macroeconomics.  
   This module aims to:  
   
   
    provide a sound basis in the fundamentals of macroeconomics and their application to both theoretical and real world situations  
    develop analytical skills using the major methods of mathematics and diagrams  
    engender the ability to communicate and report findings, particularly via tutorial essays, presentations and exercises  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Foundations of Microeconomics 
  
  
   This module begins by analysing how the economic choices of households and firms can be understood using consumer and producer theory. It then looks at how these individual choices are aggregated into market demand and supply to be mediated through the price mechanism.  
   A variety of market settings are considered, ranging from the paradigm of perfect competition to strategic interactions in oligopolistic markets. The module concludes by providing an introduction to the normative evaluation of economic outcomes in terms of individuals’ welfare, covering both market and government failures.  
   This module aims to:  
   
   
    provide a sound basis in the fundamentals of micro-economics and their application to both theoretical and real world situations  
    develop analytical skills using the major methods of mathematics and diagrams  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Writing Economics 
  
  
  
    This module aims to introduce students to the essential skills required for writing as an economist. It will be delivered in conjunction with Libraries, Research and Learning Resources (LRLR), who will cover content on key information skills relating to the library and learning resources. 
   
   
    
   
  
    The module will centre around economic approaches to analysing human behaviour and provide a guide to good economics writing. It will give an introduction to the language of economics and basic research skills. Among the topics covered will be: 
   
   
   
    
     academic integrity and plagiarism  
     time management  
     writing essays  
     writing quantitative projects  
     presentation skills  
     referencing and using the internet  
     revision and examinations  
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     introduce students to the issues and methods underpinning effective study at the Nottingham School of Economics  
     highlight the resources that are available at the University and how to access them  
     highlight the practical techniques to get the most out of study time  
     indicate good essay technique  
     highlight how to perform well in examinations  
    
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Core philosophy modules include:   
  Appearance and Reality Elementary Logic Introduction to Ethics Reasoning and Argument Self, Mind and Body  
  Typical year two modules  
  Core economics modules  
 
   Careers and Employability for Economists 
  
  
  
    This module aims to provide a means for enabling students to reflect on their personal development and the implications this might have for their future career paths. 
   
   
    
   
  
    It will include: 
   
   
    
   
  
    • Guidance on recording and evaluating skills 
   
  
    • Guidance on careers from the Centre for Career Development 
   
  
    • Information, guidance and advice form a range of graduate employers and alumni 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
   
  
    • raise the profile of employability issues within the undergraduate programme 
   
  
    • provide students with the opportunity to reflect formally on their learning and wider experiences while at university 
   
  
    • develop skills of reflection and recording amongst the student body 
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Principles of Macroeconomics 
  
  
  
    This module will address both the fundamental and applied aspects of macroeconomic theory. 
   
   
    
   
  
    In particular, the module will focus on: 
   
   
   
    
     Introducing the modern theory of expectations and economic dynamics  
     Using this approach to think about short run fluctuations  
     Studying the role of macro policy on short run fluctuations  
    
   
  
    The module will review the so-called modern approach to aggregate demand and aggregate supply. This entails incorporating into the classical approach to aggregate supply and aggregate demand insights from Keynesian economics. This will serve as a base to discuss the role of macro-policy in controlling for fluctuations in output and employment. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     introduce the students to the main issues and developments of modern macroeconomics.  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Principles of Microeconomics 
  
  
  
    Intermediate microeconomics including general equilibrium analysis, welfare economics, elementary game theory, and strategic behaviour of firms. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     build upon the microeconomics you encountered in year 1  
     develop analytical skills by employing standard diagrammatic analysis and reference to the underlying mathematical techniques  
    
   
  
 
     
  
   
  Typical year three modules  
  There are no core modules for year three.   
  A full list of modules available in the School of Economics can be found on the School's website.