Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  For an insight into the modules that the Department of Philosophy may provide check the school website.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules (post-A level route)   
  
  
  
    Introduction to French and Francophone Studies (core module) 
   
  
    You will receive a firm grounding in the structures of French through the core language module. You will also follow a core module 'Introduction to French and Francophone Studies' which will prepare you for studying the range of topics and skills you will develop in your degree course. You will also choose optional modules in French literature and the history and politics of contemporary France.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    French 1 (core module) 
   
   
   You’ll develop your understanding of the French language including grammar, written expression, aural and oral skills. 3 hours per week will be spent in lectures, workshops, and oral classes with a native speaker studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    France: History and Identity 
   
   
   The module aims to introduce students to the course of French history since the late Middle Ages through the study of a series of historical figures, their times and lives, how their 'stories' are written and woven into the fabric of 'le roman de la nation' (the national story) and how they have been appropriated to serve a range of different ends. It will also introduce students to the iconography and visual manifestations of the French historical landscape.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to French Literature: Landmarks in Narrative 
   
   
   This module aims to introduce students to the critical study of French narrative, covering key examples of novels from the seventeenth century to the present. In studying each text we will focus on (a) understanding the text within its historical context, and (b) developing critical approaches to the text. The module will develop students’ key skills in literary study, from the basics of understanding a text with unfamiliar syntax and vocabulary, to close reading and the application of complex literary theories. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary France 
   
   
   This module will focus on a selection of themes: French political institutions, with particular emphasis on the presidency; political parties in France; Immigration and identity, including questions of identity in contemporary French culture. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to French Literature: Representations of Paris 
   
   
   This module aims to introduce students to the comparative study of literature and culture, inviting students to consider how Paris is represented in a range of texts (poetic, narrative and filmic) in the modern period (post-1800). Students will learn reading techniques adapted to different genres and media, and to consider representations of the city within their broader social, historical and critical contexts. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Reasoning and Argument: An Introduction to Philosophical Method 
   
   
   In this module you will learn a series of key skills needed to follow critical methods of philosophical inquiry. It will help you understand the structure and nature of arguments of others and improve your reasoning ability to assist you in your further studies during your course. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Ethics 
   
   
   This module introduces you to some of the main ethical questions studied by philosophers. The first part focuses on some contemporary moral problems (for example, the justification of punishment). The second part of the course looks at some normative ethical theories and concepts that provide ways of approaching such moral problems. The third part of the course considers some challenges to the idea of systematic moral inquiry (such as relativism, egoism and emotivism). You will spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Self, Mind and Body 
   
   
   In this module you will be introduced to the important central issues in philosophy of self, mind and body which continue to be debated to present day. You will examine Descartes’s Meditations focusing on his thoughts on dualism and mind-body interaction, comparing these with other related topics. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Appearance and Reality 
   
   
   In this module you will examine some of the central themes surrounding the work of John Locke, one of the first philosophers who sought to integrate philosophy with our modern scientific worldview. Topics covered include empiricism and science, perception, justification and scepticism and the nature of objects among others. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Elementary Logic 
   
   
   This module provides an introduction to modern logic including technical vocabulary required to aid your understanding of modern philosophical work. You will discuss the symbolism of modern logic, the theory of the structure of thought and practice translation between symbolism and English. You will have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Issues in Feminist Philosophy 
   
   
   This module will provide an introduction to some of the issues discussed in contemporary feminist philosophy, considering a range of sometimes opposing feminist views on topics including: pornography, feminine appearance, and gender roles within the family and in the workplace. You will also examine the ways in which feminist writers have shown that matters not traditionally considered political do in fact have political significance. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Western Philosophy 
   
   
    Through considering some of the greatest thinkers who have ever lived, you will become familiar with some of the main philosophical ideas which have shaped western analytical philosophy. You will understand how and why these ideas arose and the context in which they were developed. The thinkers which could be covered include: Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, St Augustine, St Aquinas, and Hume, among others. You will spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year One Modules (beginners' route)   
  
  
  
    French 1 (Beginners) (core module) 
   
   
    The module focuses on the intensive study from beginners’ level of the five key skills of listening, speaking, writing, reading, and grammatical competence. The module will use a set text book, but this will also be supplemented with other exercises and materials designed to work towards the specific requirements of a degree programme in French Studies, whereby students come into contact with modules in French literature, culture, history or linguistics. 
       
   
  
      
   
  
    History and Identity 
   
   
   The module aims to introduce students to the course of French history since the late Middle Ages through the study of a series of historical figures, their times and lives, how their 'stories' are written and woven into the fabric of 'le roman de la nation' (the national story) and how they have been appropriated to serve a range of different ends. It will also introduce students to the iconography and visual manifestations of the French historical landscape.  
   
  
      
   
  
    France: Twentieth-Century Texts in Translation 
   
   
    The module offers an introduction to aspects of twentieth-century French culture and society to be studied through a selection of literary texts studied in English translation. By choosing texts with varied thematic and formal features the module will give an insight into the range of themes and issues which have preoccupied writers in France in the twentieth century. The module will also raise students’ awareness of a range of literary styles and techniques and the ways in which these may influence the reader.
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Reasoning and Argument: An Introduction to Philosophical Method 
   
   
   In this module you will learn a series of key skills needed to follow critical methods of philosophical inquiry. It will help you understand the structure and nature of arguments of others and improve your reasoning ability to assist you in your further studies during your course. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Ethics 
   
   
   This module introduces you to some of the main ethical questions studied by philosophers. The first part focuses on some contemporary moral problems (for example, the justification of punishment). The second part of the course looks at some normative ethical theories and concepts that provide ways of approaching such moral problems. The third part of the course considers some challenges to the idea of systematic moral inquiry (such as relativism, egoism and emotivism). You will spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Self, Mind and Body 
   
   
   In this module you will be introduced to the important central issues in philosophy of self, mind and body which continue to be debated to present day. You will examine Descartes’s Meditations focusing on his thoughts on dualism and mind-body interaction, comparing these with other related topics. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Appearance and Reality 
   
   
   In this module you will examine some of the central themes surrounding the work of John Locke, one of the first philosophers who sought to integrate philosophy with our modern scientific worldview. Topics covered include empiricism and science, perception, justification and scepticism and the nature of objects among others. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Elementary Logic 
   
   
   This module provides an introduction to modern logic including technical vocabulary required to aid your understanding of modern philosophical work. You will discuss the symbolism of modern logic, the theory of the structure of thought and practice translation between symbolism and English. You will have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Issues in Feminist Philosophy 
   
   
   This module will provide an introduction to some of the issues discussed in contemporary feminist philosophy, considering a range of sometimes opposing feminist views on topics including: pornography, feminine appearance, and gender roles within the family and in the workplace. You will also examine the ways in which feminist writers have shown that matters not traditionally considered political do in fact have political significance. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Western Philosophy 
   
   
   Through considering some of the greatest thinkers who have ever lived, you will become familiar with some of the main philosophical ideas which have shaped western analytical philosophy. You will understand how and why these ideas arose and the context in which they were developed. The thinkers which could be covered include: Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, St Augustine, St Aquinas, and Hume, among others. You will spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules (post-A level route)   
  
  
  
    French 2 (core module) 
   
   
   Building upon the language module studied in Year 1, you’ll further improve your skills in reading, listening, speaking, creative writing and translation. You’ll spend 2 hours per week in workshops and in oral classes with a native speaker for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Sociolinguistics: An Introduction 
   
   
   In this introduction to sociolinguistics, you’ll consider the social contexts of language use, paying particular attention to intercultural communication, politeness, linguistic determinism, language choice, speech act theory, and approaches to the study of speech. You’ll be required to do weekly readings and to engage in discussions during a 2 hour lecture held once a week. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary France and Globalisation 
   
   
    This module looks at contemporary French society in the context of an increasingly globalised culture and economy. The module analyses recent attempts to defend, redefine and adapt key aspects of French economic and cultural life in order to negotiate ways of living in an era of globalisation. The material in the module focuses on key debates around globalisation: the national and the ‘local’ versus the global; constructions of Frenchness in opposition to America; the decline of rural France; the contemporary redefinition and possible continued significance of established French values and cultural practices; and the problems associated with maintaining a distinctively French social model in the face of globalisation.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Caribbean Francophone Writing 
   
   
   In this introduction to literature in French from the Caribbean, you’ll study texts by authors from Martinique and Guadeloupe, and will combine discussion of the contexts with critical analyses of the texts themselves. You’ll spend around 2 hours per week in lectures and seminars if you study this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Post-War French Theatre 
   
   
   Examining the experimental theatre which flourished in France in the 1950s and 1960s, you’ll consider authors such as Genet, Beckett and Ionesco. Focusing on dramatic technique, theory, and performance, you’ll spend around 2 hours per week studying in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    New Wave French Cinema 
   
   
   Introducing you to teaching in film analysis, you’ll consider a particular period of French cinema through a detailed study of the New Wave. You’ll spend between 2-3 hours a week in lectures and seminars for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Enlightenment Literature: An Introduction 
   
   
    This module is an introduction to the study of eighteenth-century French literature, through a variety of texts chosen to offer an accessible approach to the period’s main literary genres and movements of thought.
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Political Philosophy 
   
   
   This module combines consideration of the political philosophy of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and J.S. Mill with related themes in contemporary debates. The module is designed to introduce you to each of the thinkers and then to consider how related issues are treated by contemporary writers. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy of Mind 
   
   
   This module aims to introduce you to some of the major issues within contemporary philosophy of mind. We will examine four topics and the interactions between them: intentionality, consciousness, mental causation and the status of physicalism. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Epistemology 
   
   
   This module explores contemporary treatments of issues pertaining to knowledge and the justification of belief. It addresses issues such as the following: the structure of justification and its relation to one's mental states and evidence; the justification of induction; the notion of a priori justification and the relation between your evidence and what you know, among others. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Normative Ethics 
   
   
   You will gain an in-depth understanding of the main positions in contemporary normative ethics: their variations, strengths, weaknesses and historical precedents. You will have a weekly two- hour lecture and one- hour seminar. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules (beginners' route)   
  
  
  
    French 2 (Beginners) (core module) 
   
   
    The module builds on the intensive language study undertaken in the first year, developing the key skills of listening, speaking, writing, reading, and grammatical competence. In this way it is anticipated that, by the end of the second year, students will be linguistically equipped to cope with the challenges of the year abroad.
       
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to French and Francophone Studies 
   
   
    You will receive a firm grounding in the structures of French through the core language module. You will also follow a core module 'Introduction to French and Francophone Studies' which will prepare you for studying the range of topics and skills you will develop in your degree course. You will also choose optional modules in French literature and the history and politics of contemporary France.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Political Philsophy 
   
   
    This module combines consideration of the political philosophy of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and J.S. Mill with related themes in contemporary debates. The module is designed to introduce you to each of the thinkers and then to consider how related issues are treated by contemporary writers. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy of Mind 
   
   
    This module aims to introduce you to some of the major issues within contemporary philosophy of mind. We will examine four topics and the interactions between them: intentionality, consciousness, mental causation and the status of physicalism. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Epistemology 
   
   
    This module explores contemporary treatments of issues pertaining to knowledge and the justification of belief. It addresses issues such as the following: the structure of justification and its relation to one's mental states and evidence; the justification of induction; the notion of a priori justification and the relation between your evidence and what you know, among others. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Normative Ethics 
   
  
    You will gain an in-depth understanding of the main positions in contemporary normative ethics: their variations, strengths, weaknesses and historical precedents. You will have a weekly two- hour lecture and one- hour seminar.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Year Three   
  
  
  You will spend year three in France or a Francophone country, on a programme of studies in a higher education institution, as an assistant in a school or on a work placement. For more information, see the Department of French and Francophone Studies' 
  Study Abroad page. 
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules (post-A level and beginners' routes)   
  
  
  
    French 3 (core module) 
   
   
   Building on the skills gained in Years one and and two, you’ll further develop your oral and written skills, translation into and out of French, creative writing in different registers, linguistic commentary and production of summaries, as well as perfecting your French grammar and vocabulary. In the course of this year-long module, you’ll spend two hours per week in language workshops and in oral classes with a native speaker. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Citizenship, Ethnicity and National Identity in Post-War France 
   
   
   You’ll examine the range of social, political and philosophical questions raised by mass immigration to France in the post-war period. These questions will be tackled through historical analysis of patterns of migration and changing immigration policies, as well as through the study of relevant films, novels and theoretical texts. You’ll spend 2 hours each week in lectures and seminars studying this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Individual and Society 
   
   
   You’ll explore the ways in which French social theory and fiction have thought through the changing nature of the individual and the self in society. You’ll spend 2 hours in lectures and workshops each week studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Contemporary Representations of Travel 
   
   
   From tourism to exploration, from exile to migration, from pilgrimage to business travel, we will question the tacit ideologies found in contemporary travel discourses. The importance of this field has been steadily growing in between disciplines that range from literary studies to ethnography. The module will use these cross-cultural influences to create an arena in which to develop connections between key disciplines and different forms of arts (literature, ethnography, films photography). You will spend 2 hours a week in seminars for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Theories and Practices of Translation 
   
   
   You’ll examine the history of translation and different translation models across a range of genres, including novel, drama, audiovisual media and poetry. For each theory, you’ll examine a number of case studies, either French texts translated into English or English texts into French. Spending around 1.5 hours per week in lectures, you’ll be encouraged to develop a critical and reflective approach to translation practice.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Peuple and Propaganda 
   
   
   Studying various forms of artistic works taken from key moments in the French Revolutionary decade (1789 – 1799), you’ll consider the reflection of contemporary events in such works. Around 2 hours per week will be spent in lectures and seminars studying this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    The Everyday in Modern French Fiction 
   
   
   The module looks at the various ways in which the novel has evolved and adapted to “the contemporary” by responding to the “everyday”. Giving an overview of the various approaches to the everyday in the contemporary novel from the 60s to the present, this module will explore how key authors negotiate, through their writing, the everyday’s indeterminacy and the unstable space it occupies between the social and the individual. You will spend 2 hours a week in lectures and seminars on this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Language and Social Interaction 
   
   
   This module undertakes a detailed study of spoken language as a fundamental resource for human action and social organisation. Examination of both ordinary conversation and institutional discourse will enable you to explore the ways in which actions are performed, identities constructed and context achieved through talk. You’ll have a 2 hour lecture each week for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Francophone Writing in Canada 
   
   
   This module studies a selection of texts which have played a significant part in establishing a tradition of Canadian writing in French. The module includes texts by both Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois and non-Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois writers. The texts are studied in the context of the specific cultures to which they belong and of the reception they found. You will spend 2 hours a week in lectures and seminars for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Dissertation in French 
   
   
   You’ll undertake an in-depth study into a chosen subject within French and Francophone Studies, and will produce a 7,500 word dissertation. Teaching takes place in the form of regular individual meetings with the allocated supervisor, and group meetings with the module convenor, centred more generally on research and writing skills. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Distributive Justice 
   
   
   This module will take a detailed look at one of the main topics of contemporary analytical political philosophy: the theory of distributive justice. This theory attempts to specify abstractly the conditions under which a distribution of benefits and burdens amongst a group of persons would be just. You will consider challenges to the legitimacy of any redistributive principle, and attempts to accommodate values such as responsibility and choice in different patterns of distribution. You will have a two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar each week. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Contemporary Meta-Ethics 
   
   
   This module will take a detailed look at the main arguments and themes in contemporary meta-ethics. It will trace the development of contemporary debates in meta-ethics from their beginnings in the work of G. E. Moore up to the most recent arguments between naturalism and non-naturalism, cognitivism and non-cognitivism. You will have a two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar each week. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy of Art 
   
   
   This module aims to promote a deeper understanding of philosophical issues pertaining to art. By the end of the module, you should be able to discuss and evaluate different views of the expressive power of art, to explain certain current view on expression and representation, and to present the main contemporary viewpoints pertaining to the nature of artworks. You will have a two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar each week. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Marx 
   
   
   In this module you will be introduced to the theories of Karl Marx through selected texts from his works. Topics covers will include alienation, the material conception of history, the labour theory of value and French political theory among others. You will gain an understanding of concepts essential for advanced study on this course.