Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Introduction to German Studies 
   
  
    This year-long module provides an introduction to the study of German and is compulsory for most students of German. It covers the main fields of German Studies: literature, culture, history, linguistics, media and film. You will be introduced to the study skills required for academic study: critical and analytic skills, reading skills, presentation skills and writing skills. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Self, Mind and Body 
   
  
    In this module you will be introduced to the important central issues in philosophy of self, mind and body which continue to be debated to present day. You will examine Descartes’s Meditations focusing on his thoughts on dualism and mind-body interaction, comparing these with other related topics. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Appearance and Reality 
   
  
    In this module you will examine some of the central themes surrounding the work of John Locke, one of the first philosophers who sought to integrate philosophy with our modern scientific worldview. Topics covered include empiricism and science, perception, justification and scepticism and the nature of objects among others. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Reasoning and Argument: An Introduction to Philosophical Method 
   
   
   In this module you will learn a series of key skills needed to follow critical methods of philosophical inquiry. It will help you understand the structure and nature of arguments of others and improve your reasoning ability to assist you in your further studies during your course. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Elementary Logic 
   
   
   This module provides an introduction to modern logic including technical vocabulary required to aid your understanding of modern philosophical work. You will discuss the symbolism of modern logic, the theory of the structure of thought and practice translation between symbolism and English. You will have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Ethics 
   
  
    This module introduces you to some of the main ethical questions studied by philosophers. The first part focuses on some contemporary moral problems (for example, the justification of punishment). The second part of the course looks at some normative ethical theories and concepts that provide ways of approaching such moral problems. The third part of the course considers some challenges to the idea of systematic moral inquiry (such as relativism, egoism and emotivism). You will spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.
    
   
  
      
   
   Either  
  
    German 1 
   
   
    Using up-to-date material from the German-speaking world this core module will help you improve your command of written and spoken German. Continuing with the four skills areas of A-level work (writing, reading, listening, and speaking) you will develop them further through a variety of exercises whilst gaining insights into contemporary German life, culture and politics. For this module you will have one 1-hour grammar lecture each week and three 1-hour tutorials per week where you will work in small groups usually led by German native speakers. In addition you are expected to undertake at least four hours of private study each week.  
   
  
      
   
   Or  
  
    German 1 - Beginners 
   
   
    This module is designed to take students from ab initio level (absolute beginners) to a level of written and aural comprehension, writing and speaking skills roughly commensurate with A-level. At the end of the module, students should be able to comprehend and respond to written and aural texts over a comprehensive range of current affairs, cultural and every day topics and engage in everyday social conversation.  
      
   
  
      
   
   Optional  
  
    Hitler and the Third Reich 
   
  
    This module will explore the period of National Socialism in Germany (1933-1945). You will be introduced to an outline of the historical context of this period and critically review the ideology and politics of the time with a focus on society and culture. You will evaluate original sources (in original and in translation) such as posters, speeches, newspapers and films. In addition, theoretical writings on select topics such as propaganda, ‘leader cult’, media, childhood, womanhood and ‘the other;’ will assist in your critical analysis. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week in addition to four hours of private study. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Issues in Feminist Philosophy 
   
  
    This module will provide an introduction to some of the issues discussed in contemporary feminist philosophy, considering a range of sometimes opposing feminist views on topics including: pornography, feminine appearance, and gender roles within the family and in the workplace. You will also examine the ways in which feminist writers have shown that matters not traditionally considered political do in fact have political significance. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Western Philosophy 
   
  
    Through considering some of the greatest thinkers who have ever lived, you will become familiar with some of the main philosophical ideas which have shaped western analytical philosophy. You will understand how and why these ideas arose and the context in which they were developed. The thinkers which could be covered include: Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, St Augustine, St Aquinas, and Hume, among others. You will spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
   
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Reading German Literature 
   
   
    In this module you will be introduced to the critical reading and textual analysis of German narrative literature and poetry from the late 18th century to today. You will study two mid-length narrative texts and a selection of poems which represent key phases and aspects of German literary and cultural development from ‘Goethezeit’ to the post-1945 and contemporary period. In analysing and discussing a range of texts and authors, you will be introduced to key concepts and techniques of textual analysis, to the structures of narrative and poetry, and to selected themes and developments in literary criticism. The module combines one 1-hour introductory lecture per week with in-depth study in small tutorial groups (one 1-hour tutorial per week), in addition you will undertake four hours of private study per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Reading German Culture 
   
  
    In this module you will learn to analyse short literary and popular texts (including film) which portray life in the metropolis Berlin and represent  key phases in German historical and social development in the 20th century: the 1920s, the immediate post war-period, post-unification Berlin. Exploring cultural representations of urban life the course will address key questions such as: How do textual perceptions of the ‘big’ city reflect attitudes towards relationships conditioned by class, gender and race? For this module you will have one 2-hour seminars each week in addition to four hours of private study. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Linguistics 1: The Sounds of German 
   
   
    This module investigates the sounds of German and how they can be described accurately (“phonetics and phonology”). Students will learn to transcribe German using the notation of the International Phonetic Association, and we will look in particular at aspects of German pronunciation that are hard to master because they are different to English or similar to French. We will also look at how foreign words (including English words) are integrated into the German sound system, and at regional variation in spoken German. Developing accurate listening and transcription skills will form a major part of the module. There will be a one hour lecture and a one hour workshop each week, in addition to four hours private study time.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
   Either  
  
    German 2 
   
   
   This core module consolidates your proficiency in the four skill areas of German Language 1 (writing, reading, listening, and speaking) in order to develop these further. Using contemporary material this module is also tailor-made to prepare you for the period you will spend in a German-speaking country studying, working or teaching. It includes German CV writing, interview preparations, presentations, translation from and into German and advanced grammar work. For this module you will be taught in small groups, usually by German native speakers. You will have one 2-hour seminar and one 1- hour grammar tutorial each week in addition to a minimum of four hours of private study.
    
   
  
      
   
      
   Or  
  
    German 2 - Beginners 
   
   
    This module will consolidate students' proficiency in the four skill areas of German Language 1 (writing, reading, listening and speaking) and develop these further. The vehicles for instruction will be texts from newspapers and other sources, which will be used for discussion of translation issues and grammatical structures, linguistic analysis and textual comparison, oral presentation, and essay writing.  
      
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional   
  
    Political Philosophy 
   
   
   This module combines consideration of the political philosophy of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and J.S. Mill with related themes in contemporary debates. The module is designed to introduce you to each of the thinkers and then to consider how related issues are treated by contemporary writers. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy of Mind 
   
   
   This module aims to introduce you to some of the major issues within contemporary philosophy of mind. We will examine four topics and the interactions between them: intentionality, consciousness, mental causation and the status of physicalism. You will have a weekly two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Epistemology 
   
   
   This module explores contemporary treatments of issues pertaining to knowledge and the justification of belief. It addresses issues such as the following: the structure of justification and its relation to one's mental states and evidence; the justification of induction; the notion of a priori justification and the relation between your evidence and what you know, among others. You will have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Normative Ethics 
   
   
   You will gain an in-depth understanding of the main positions in contemporary normative ethics: their variations, strengths, weaknesses and historical precedents. You will have a weekly two- hour lecture and one- hour seminar. 
   
  
      
   
   
   From Bourgeois Wife to New Woman: Sex & Gender in Modern Germany 
   
   
   This module focuses on three periods in the modern history of the German-speaking lands: the emergence of bourgeois gender roles in the nineteenth century & the women’s movement around 1848; the  
   fin-de-si&egrave;cle
   , with a particular focus on gender and sexuality in Viennese society; and the Weimar Republic, exploring the myth and reality of the so-called ‘New Woman’. Drawing on a range of political, theoretical and autobiographical texts and visual material, the module considers the interrelation between social and economic developments, gender roles and notions of masculinity and femininity. We also discuss the ways in which ideas and images of masculinity and femininity are deployed in the representation of political and social institutions and processes. Each week you will have a one hour lecture and a one hour seminar, as well as four hours of private study time. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Literary Translation 
   
   
    This module explores theoretical approaches and practical problems in literary translation of the same texts and themselves compose a translation of a text of their choice.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    German Life Writing 
   
   
    The module examines autobiographies, biographies, memoirs, diaries, interviews, and letters by well known authors and by relatively unknown individuals who have lived through key turning points in twentieth century German: the First World War, the Second World War, the collapse of the GDR, and German Unification. Students will consider key themes such as freedom, and compulsion, guilt and responsibility, and they will examine individuals’ interpretations of their lives, and how individuals locate themselves in larger historical narratives.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Runes to ROFL: History of the Germanic Languages 
   
   
    This module will introduce students to the history of the Germanic languages, from the earliest linguistic evidence up to the present day. We will investigate the major sound changes that distinguish Dutch, German and other Germanic languages like English from the rest of the Indo-European language family (which includes French, Greek, and many other European languages, as well as Sanskrit). We will then look at the process by which Dutch and German went their separate ways, ultimately emerging as two separate standardized languages in the 17th century. We will also look at how the languages are developing today, especially obvious in the borrowings from many other languages and in the innovations that have emerged in “computer mediated communication”.
      
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
 
     
  
   Year Three: You will spend this year in  Germany or Austria as a language assistant in a school, on an approved course of study or on a work placement. For more information, please see the Department of German Studies' Study Abroad page.   
  
   Typical Year Four Modules 
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    German 3 
   
  
    This core module aims to consolidate the high level of language skills you will have acquired during the time spent in a German-speaking country in Year 3.  In classes taught by native speakers of German, you will further refine your advanced proficiency in written and spoken German. Contemporary texts and discussions of up-to-date topics are a key feature of this module and you will be encouraged to build on the knowledge and skills acquired during your year abroad. For this module you will have two 1-hour seminars each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Translation from German 
   
  
    This core module will enhance your practical command and effective understanding of written and German and English on the basis of your progress during your year abroad, through translation of a variety of German texts and passages. This module will develop your translation skills towards professional standards for translation into English. For this module you will have one 2-hour seminar each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study.
    
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Introduction to Contemporary Meta-Ethics 
   
  
    This module will take a detailed look at the main arguments and themes in contemporary meta-ethics. It will trace the development of contemporary debates in meta-ethics from their beginnings in the work of G. E. Moore up to the most recent arguments between naturalism and non-naturalism, cognitivism and non-cognitivism. You will have a two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy of Art 
   
  
    This module aims to promote a deeper understanding of philosophical issues pertaining to art. By the end of the module, you should be able to discuss and evaluate different views of the expressive power of art, to explain certain current view on expression and representation, and to present the main contemporary viewpoints pertaining to the nature of artworks. You will have a two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Marx 
   
  
    In this module you will be introduced to the theories of Karl Marx through selected texts from his works. Topics covers will include alienation, the material conception of history, the labour theory of value and French political theory among others. You will gain an understanding of concepts essential for advanced study on this course.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Distributive Justice 
   
  
    This module will take a detailed look at one of the main topics of contemporary analytical political philosophy: the theory of distributive justice. This theory attempts to specify abstractly the conditions under which a distribution of benefits and burdens amongst a group of persons would be just. You will consider challenges to the legitimacy of any redistributive principle, and attempts to accommodate values such as responsibility and choice in different patterns of distribution. You will have a two-hour lecture and one-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Dissertation (German Studies) 
   
  
    This module involves the in-depth study of a topic in German Studies resulting in a dissertation written in German. You will write a 4,000 word essay in German or English on a topic of your particular interest and expertise (normally related to a German module which you have taken in your second or final year). In addition to extensive private study you will have two 1-hour seminars per semester followed by five individual meetings with your supervisor. This module is also available as a 20 credit version where you will write a 7,000 word essay in German or English.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Culture and Society in the Weimar Republic 
   
   
    The Weimar Republic (1919-1933) was one of the most fascinating and culturally productive periods of German history, but it was equally plagued by crises and violent conflicts. This module aims to introduce central issues in the literary and social developments of Weimar Germany. You will study a wide range of materials (literary texts, film, aesthetic and political programmes) to analyse key features of the period. Topics will include the impact of the Great War, developments in the press and the cinema, political confrontations, cabaret, and unemployment. You will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar per week in addition to extensive independent study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Recent Women's Writing 
   
  
    In this module you will explore a number of novels and stories written since 1960 by German-speaking women writers. You will also study selected texts on the cultural, political and social contexts of the rise of the second wave feminism in the 1970’s, the changing position of women in the FRG, GDR and Austria, and the increasing awareness of ethnic pluralities. You will compare texts and contexts and explore a variety of reading strategies developed in feminist criticism. For this module you will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar each week in addition to extensive independent study.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Translation and Linguistic Exchange 
   
   
    This module offers in-depth discussion of grammatical, lexical and idiomatic aspects of German and English as well as issues of translation, register and cultural difference. You will be taught primarily through the medium of translation, both from and into German, using a variety of texts and passages on a range of topics and in a range of registers. You will work in a team with exchange students who are German native speakers and this will foster dialogue about linguistic and translation issues as well as general cultural exchange. You will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar per week in addition to independent study.