Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
  
    Elementary Logic 
   
  
    This module provides an introduction to modern logic including technical vocabulary required to aide your understanding of modern philosophical work. You’ll discuss the symbolism of modern logic, the theory of the structure of thought and practice translation between symbolism and English. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Appearance and Reality 
   
  
    In this module you’ll examine some of the central themes surrounding the work of John Locke, one of the first philosophers who sought to integrate philosophy with our modern scientific worldview. Topics covered include: empiricism and science, perception, justification and scepticism and the nature of objects among others. You’ll have two hours of lectures and on some weeks an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on other weeks throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Ethics 
   
  
    This module introduces you to some of the main ethical questions studied by philosophers. The first part focuses on some contemporary moral problems (for example, the justification of punishment). The second part of the course looks at some normative ethical theories and concepts that provide ways of approaching such moral problems. The third part of the course considers some challenges to the idea of systematic moral inquiry (such as relativism, egoism and emotivism). You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Reasoning and Argument: An Introduction to Philosophical Method 
   
  
    In this module you’ll learn a series of key skills needed to follow critical methods of philosophical inquiry. The aim is to help you understand the structure and nature of arguments of others and improve your reasoning ability to assist you in your further studies during your course. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on other weeks throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Self, Mind and Body 
   
  
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the important central issues in philosophy of self, mind and body which continue to be debated to present day. You’ll examine Descarte’s Meditations focusing on his thoughts on dualism and mind-body interaction, comparing these with other related topics. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Ethics 
   
  
    What is the moral status of animals? What are the limits of free speech? What are the moral issues when discussing abortion? Is affirmative action unjust? In this module you will be looking at these and other issues that arise when we try to put ethics into practice. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Existence of God 
   
  
    This module will examine the basic philosophical issues that concern the existence of God. The lectures will cover such topics including: Cosmological Argument, the Ontological Argument, the Design Argument, and the Problem of Evil. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plato 
   
  
    This module will discuss a number of problems tackled by Plato. Attention will be given to the development of the theory of the forms, but we will be working towards an understanding of the motivations for the development of this theory which may be found in his moral/political philosophy. You’ll have two hours of lectures for some weeks and an hour-long lecture in others with an hour-long seminar throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Issues in Feminist Philosophy 
   
  
    This module will provide an introduction to some of the issues discussed in contemporary feminist philosophy, considering a range of sometimes opposing feminist views on topics including: pornography, feminine appearance, and gender roles within the family and in the workplace. You’ll also examine the ways in which feminist writers have shown that matters not traditionally considered political do in fact have political significance. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Western Philosophy 
   
  
    Through considering some of the greatest thinkers who have ever lived, you will become familiar with some of the main philosophical ideas which have shaped western analytical philosophy. You will understand how and why these ideas arose and the context in which they were developed. The thinkers which could be covered include: Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, St Augustine, St Aquinas, Hume, among others. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Christian Thought to 1600 
   
  
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the lives and works of some key theologians, from the first Christian thinkers in the 2nd century, up to the Reformation and Counter-Reformation in the 16th  century. Figures will include Augustine, Aquinas and Luther. It focuses upon the ideas of the theologians, but places them in their broader historical and ecclesiastical context. You’ll have two hours of lectures and an hour-long seminar weekly studying this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Islam 
   
  
    This module examines the narrative and textual foundations of the Islamic tradition including the Qur'an, the prophetic tradition and the life events of the Prophet Muhammad. You’ll also look at the development and structure of Islamic society, law, doctrine and spirituality through the classical period, and Muslim responses to challenges posed by modernity including questions of gender and the nation state. You’ll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy for Theologians 
   
  
    This module will provide an overview of the most important philosophical ideas, theories, and arguments that are of special interest to students of theology. You’ll begin with the Greek 'natural theology' of the pre-Socratic thinkers and end with the postmodern 'turn to religion' of Emmanuel Levinas and Jacques Derrida. The method of instruction will combine historical and speculative approaches, using the perspective of the 'history of ideas'. This module is delivered through two hours of lectures and an hour-long seminar weekly.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Two Modules
   
   
  
  
  
    The Philosophy of Religion 
   
  
    In this module you’ll explore significant problems in the philosophy of religion, such as the credibility of the existence of God, the relation between religion and science, the relation between religion and morality, the problem of evil, and the possibility of an after-life. There will also be discussion of significant themes, such as the nature of being, of faith, of religious experience, of religious language, and of religious love.  This module is taught through four hours of lecture and an hour-long seminar weekly.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Following Jesus: Identity, Discipleship and Community in Early Christianity 
   
  
    In this module you will focus on five early church documents (1 Thessalonians; The Didache; Mark’s Gospel; 1 Clement; and 1 Peter) to identify the varying patterns that emerged in early churches with regard to a) their identity as followers of Jesus; b) their understanding of the nature of discipleship; and c) their understanding of themselves as a specific community within history. The module is taught through a two hour lecture and a seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Body and Soul: Christian Theological Anthropology 
   
  
    This module examines Christian theological understandings of the human person. It begins by exploring the Hebrew scriptures and ancient Greek philosophy in relation to the nature of the soul, the importance of the body and gender. Of central importance is a theological anthropology focused on the imago dei. The module will progress to the study of Christ as the true human and the mediaeval concept of the human person as a microcosm of the cosmos. The latter stages of the module will focus on theological anthropology in the context of modern philosophical anthropologies, modernity's focus on 'mind' and 'consciousness' in the understanding of the human person, and contemporary ethical issues surrounding human 'enhancement' via medical technologies. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Nature of Meaning 
   
   
   
     The module begins with an exploration of various theories of naming, paying particular attention to the works of Frege, Russell, and Kripke. We then turn our attention to various puzzles concerning the nature of meaning, including the distinction between analytic and synthetic sentences. In the final part of the module, we move on to a discussion of some of the mainstream theories of meaning; particularly, a truth-conditional semantics, and we explore how this might be developed to take into account indexical terms such as `I', `now', and `here'. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Freedom and Obligation 
   
  
    This module combines consideration of the political philosophy of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and J.S. Mill with related themes in contemporary debates. The module is designed to introduce you to each of the thinkers and then to consider how related issues are treated by contemporary writers. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Mind and Consciousness 
   
  
    This module aims to introduce you to some of the major issues within contemporary philosophy of mind. We will examine four topics and the interactions between them: intentionality, consciousness, mental causation and the status of physicalism. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Knowledge and Justification 
   
  
    This module explores contemporary treatments of issues pertaining to knowledge and the justification of belief. It addresses issues such as the following: the structure of justification and its relation to one's mental states and evidence; the justification of induction; the notion of a priori justification and the relation between your evidence and what you know, among others. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Normative Ethics 
   
   
    
    You’ll gain an in-depth understanding of the main positions in contemporary normative ethics; their variations, strengths, weaknesses and historical precedents. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar.
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Being, Becoming and Reality 
   
  
    In this module you’ll discuss several advance topics in metaphysics. The module will cover a broad range of topics including existence, nothingness and truthmaking, and truthmakers. Theories of substance, identity, constitution and composition will be explored, among others to enhance the skills required to carry out research in philosophy. The teaching will be delivered through a mixture of lectures and seminars.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
  
    Environmental Ethics 
   
  
    Environmental ethics addresses the issue of how human beings should interact with the non-human natural world. This module will cover a range of topics from contemporary philosophical literature on environmental ethics. You’ll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Problems of Religious Diversity 
   
  
    Does faith in one religion require the rejection of all others? This module presents you with the opportunity to bring together the diverse things you have learned about religion and to formulate and clarify your own viewpoint. It will provide an opportunity to explore ways of dealing with the variety of commitments to an ultimate viewpoint in the contemporary world. Approaches to other faiths from Christian theology, philosophy, and mysticism will be explored, as well as approaches from other faiths. Attempts to unify world religions will be examined alongside attempts to retain their differences, as well as causes of deep underlying conflicts between faiths. You’ll be taught through a two-hour lecture each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Free Will and Action 
   
  
    This module aims to examine some of the main philosophical issues concerning the nature and explanation of action and the requirements for free action and free will. You’ll conduct a study of some formative works and some recent contributions to the debates on these topics. Through a critical study of these topics, your skills in the analysis, evaluation, and presentation of arguments will also be enhanced. You’ll have two hours of lectures plus an hour-long seminar weekly.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Merleau-Ponty 
   
   
   
     Maurice Merleau-Ponty is associated with the philosophical movements of existentialism and 
    phenomenology. Almost all of his work is concerned with one central question: how should  
    we conceive of consciousness and the world? He holds that our current conceptions are  
    flawed; his aim is to show us this and provide new ones. You will focus on Merleau-Ponty’s  
    Phenomenology of Perception, where much of his discussion revolves around his notion of the body as subject, and consciousness as essentially embodied. The teaching will be delivered through a mixture of lectures and seminars.   
    
   
  
      
   
  
    An Introduction to Contemporary Metaethics 
   
  
    This module will take a detailed look at the main arguments and themes in contemporary metaethics. It will trace the development of contemporary debates in metaethics from their beginnnings in the work of G. E. Moore up to the most recent arguments between naturalism and non-naturalism, cognitivism and non-cognitivism. You'll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy of Art 
   
  
    This module aims to promote a deeper understanding of philosophical issues pertaining to art. By the end of the module, you should be able to discuss and evaluate different views of the expressive power of art, to explain certain current view on expression and representation, and to present the main contemporary viewpoints pertaining to the nature of artworks. You’ll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Marx 
   
  
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the theories of Karl Marx through selected texts from his works. Topics covers will include: alienation, the material conception of history, the labour theory of value and French political theory among others. You’ll gain an understanding of concepts essential for advanced study on this course.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Utilitarianism 
   
  
    This module will take a detailed look at one of the main topics of contemporary analytical political philosophy: the theory of distributive justice. This theory attempts to specify abstractly the conditions under which a distribution of benefits and burdens amongst a group of persons would be just. You will consider challenges to the legitimacy of any redistributive principle, and attempts to accommodate values such as responsibility and choice in different patterns of distribution. You’ll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Buddhist Philosophy 
   
   
    
    The module will focus on a critical examination of core aspects of Buddhist thinking, with emphasis on some of its basic psychological, spiritual, and metaphysical conceptions. These include, in particular: the origin and nature of suffering, the no-self thesis, enlightenment, consciousness, experiential knowing, and the doctrine of Emptiness ( the lack of inherent nature in all things and impermanence). The module will focus particularly on N&acirc;g&acirc;rjuna’s philosophy of the ‘middle way’ and some modern commentaries on it. The module will approach Buddhism as a philosophical world-view, rather than as a religious one. The module will not be involved in detailed exegesis of ancient texts. When possible the module will try to link Buddhist conceptions to contemporary ideas about personhood, consciousness and the fundamental nature of reality. You will have a mixture of seminars and lectures for this module.