Modules  
  The following are examples of modules which you may study over the course of your degree. You can also view our undergraduate module guide (PDF).  
  Please view the Department of Philosophy and School of Politics and International Relations for information on their modules.  
  Typical year one modules  
  Core modules  
 
   Foundations of Macroeconomics 
  
  
   Macroeconomics is the study of the aggregate economy. This module will focus on the determinants of aggregate output, both in the short run - addressing cyclical movements of booms and busts - and in the long run - providing an introduction to economic growth.  
   A running theme will be debates over the role of the government in macroeconomic management, covering fiscal and monetary policy. The module will introduce a series of basic models used in modern macroeconomics.  
   This module aims to:  
   
   
    provide a sound basis in the fundamentals of macroeconomics and their application to both theoretical and real world situations  
    develop analytical skills using the major methods of mathematics and diagrams  
    engender the ability to communicate and report findings, particularly via tutorial essays, presentations and exercises  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Foundations of Microeconomics 
  
  
   This module begins by analysing how the economic choices of households and firms can be understood using consumer and producer theory. It then looks at how these individual choices are aggregated into market demand and supply to be mediated through the price mechanism.  
   A variety of market settings are considered, ranging from the paradigm of perfect competition to strategic interactions in oligopolistic markets. The module concludes by providing an introduction to the normative evaluation of economic outcomes in terms of individuals’ welfare, covering both market and government failures.  
   This module aims to:  
   
   
    provide a sound basis in the fundamentals of micro-economics and their application to both theoretical and real world situations  
    develop analytical skills using the major methods of mathematics and diagrams  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Quantitative Economics I 
  
  
   
    
     Introduction to mathematical economics: mathematical finance  
     Analysis of functions  
     Supply and demand  
     Matrix algebra  
     Differentiation  
     Elasticities  
     Maximisation/minimisation  
     Optimisation subject to constraints  
     Langrange multipliers  
     Integration  
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     provide a basis in the fundamentals of Mathematics most relevant to the study of Economics  
     allow students to see how mathematical tools can be applied in the analysis of theoretical economic problems  
     facilitate the development of analytical skills leading to an understanding of which economic problems are susceptible to a formal treatment, and which results are capable of formal proof  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Quantitative Economics II 
  
  
  
    The module introduces those statistical methods and concepts most applicable in Economics. The analysis of economic data necessarily proceeds in an environment where there is uncertainty about the processes that generated the data. Statistical methods provide a framework for understanding and characterising this uncertainty. These concepts are most conveniently introduced through the analysis of single-variable problems.  
   
   
    
   
  
    However, economists are most often concerned about relationships among variables. 
   
   
    
   
  
    The module builds towards the study of regression analysis, which is often applied by economists in studying such relationships. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     introduce such fundamental statistical concepts as probability, the normal distribution, sampling distributions, point estimation, confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing  
     introduce the ideas behind regression analysis through simple linear regression  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Writing Economics 
  
  
  
    This module aims to introduce students to the essential skills required for writing as an economist. It will be delivered in conjunction with Libraries, Research and Learning Resources (LRLR), who will cover content on key information skills relating to the library and learning resources. 
   
   
    
   
  
    The module will centre around economic approaches to analysing human behaviour and provide a guide to good economics writing. It will give an introduction to the language of economics and basic research skills. Among the topics covered will be: 
   
   
   
    
     academic integrity and plagiarism  
     time management  
     writing essays  
     writing quantitative projects  
     presentation skills  
     referencing and using the internet  
     revision and examinations  
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     introduce students to the issues and methods underpinning effective study at the Nottingham School of Economics  
     highlight the resources that are available at the University and how to access them  
     highlight the practical techniques to get the most out of study time  
     indicate good essay technique  
     highlight how to perform well in examinations  
    
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Core philosophy modules include:  
  Elementary Logic Introduction to Ethics Reasoning and Argument  
  Core politics modules include:  
  Introduction to Comparative Politics  
  Typical year two modules  
  Core modules    
 
   Careers and Employability for Economists 
  
  
  
    This module aims to provide a means for enabling students to reflect on their personal development and the implications this might have for their future career paths. 
   
   
    
   
  
    It will include: 
   
   
    
   
  
    • Guidance on recording and evaluating skills 
   
  
    • Guidance on careers from the Centre for Career Development 
   
  
    • Information, guidance and advice form a range of graduate employers and alumni 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
   
  
    • raise the profile of employability issues within the undergraduate programme 
   
  
    • provide students with the opportunity to reflect formally on their learning and wider experiences while at university 
   
  
    • develop skills of reflection and recording amongst the student body 
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Principles of Macroeconomics 
  
  
  
    This module will address both the fundamental and applied aspects of macroeconomic theory. 
   
   
    
   
  
    In particular, the module will focus on: 
   
   
   
    
     Introducing the modern theory of expectations and economic dynamics  
     Using this approach to think about short run fluctuations  
     Studying the role of macro policy on short run fluctuations  
    
   
  
    The module will review the so-called modern approach to aggregate demand and aggregate supply. This entails incorporating into the classical approach to aggregate supply and aggregate demand insights from Keynesian economics. This will serve as a base to discuss the role of macro-policy in controlling for fluctuations in output and employment. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     introduce the students to the main issues and developments of modern macroeconomics.  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Principles of Microeconomics 
  
  
  
    Intermediate microeconomics including general equilibrium analysis, welfare economics, elementary game theory, and strategic behaviour of firms. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     build upon the microeconomics you encountered in year 1  
     develop analytical skills by employing standard diagrammatic analysis and reference to the underlying mathematical techniques  
    
   
  
 
     
  
  Typical year three modules  
  You will be able to take either 40 credits worth of politics, philosophy and economics modules or 60 credits worth of modules from any two of politics, philosophy and economics.