Modules     
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules
   
   
  
  
  
    Self, Mind and Body  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll be introduced to the important central issues in philosophy of self, mind and body which continue to be debated to present day. You’ll examine Descarte’s Meditations focusing on his thoughts on dualism and mind-body interaction, comparing these with other related topics. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Reasoning and Argument: An Introduction to Philosophical Method 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll learn a series of key skills needed to follow critical methods of philosophical inquiry. It’ll help you understand the structure and nature of arguments of others and improve your reasoning ability to assist you in your further studies during your course. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    From Newton to Einstein 
   
   
   This year-long module aims to introduce core topics in physics which will underpin all subsequent physics modules. You’ll discuss classical mechanics in the language of vectors and the key notion of harmonic motion which is extended to cover wave phenomena. You’ll have an introduction to Einstein's special theory of relativity as well as the basic ideas of electromagnetism and electrical circuits and quantum physics. There will be four hours of lectures and a one hour tutorial weekly plus 2 two-hour workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Appearance and Reality  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll examine some of the central themes surrounding the work of John Locke, one of the first philosophers who sought to integrate philosophy with our modern scientific worldview. Topics covered include empiricism and science, perception, justification and scepticism and the nature of objects among others. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Elementary Logic 
   
   
   
     This module provides an introduction to modern logic including technical vocabulary required to aide your understanding of modern philosophical work. You’ll discuss the symbolism of modern logic, the theory of the structure of thought and practice translation between symbolism and English. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules 
   
  
  
  
    The Nature of Meaning 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll explore various theories of naming, with a focus on the works of Frege, Russell and Kripke. You’ll learn about the puzzles concerning the nature of meaning including truth-conditional semantics and how this links with the terms ‘I’ ,’now’ and ‘here’. You’ll have two hours of lectures and an hour-long seminar weekly, with an extra four hour-long lectures spaced out through the semester. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Quantum World  
   
   
   This module will provide an introduction to the theory and applications of quantum mechanics, a theory that is one of the key achievements of 20th century physics. This module will begin with a discussion of simple systems and develop the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. The module will then extend the formalism to cope with the movement of particles and make links to the material that you have seen in the 'From Newton to Einstein' module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Thermal and Statistical Physics  
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll learn about the two main themes relating to the description of important physical properties of matter; thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. You’ll discover that they share common features through two hours of lectures weekly and four practical workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Classical Fields  
   
   
   In this module, the description of fields will be extended by introducing the mathematics of vector calculus. The mathematics will then be used to provide a framework for describing, understanding and using the laws of electromagnetism. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and have a 90 minute workshop each week. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
  
    Atoms, Photons and Fundamental Particles 
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll be introduced to the physics of atoms, nuclei and the fundamental constituents of matter and their interactions. You’ll gain knowledge about the quantum mechanical description of their interactions.  You’ll have two hours weekly of lectures with five 90 minute workshops throughout the year to aide your understanding. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Optional Modules  
  
  
  
    Introduction to Ethics 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll be introduced to some of the main ethical questions studied by philosophers. The first part focuses on some contemporary moral problems such as the justification of punishment. The second part looks at some normative ethical theories and concepts that provide ways of approaching such moral problems and the third part of the course considers some challenges to the idea of systematic moral inquiry such as relativism, egoism and emotivism. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Metaphysics 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll discuss several advance topics in metaphysics. The module will cover a broad range of topics including existence, nothingness and truthmaking and truthmakers. Theories of substance, identity, constitution and composition will be explored, among others to enhance the skills required to carry out research in philosophy.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Marx  
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll be introduced to the theories of Karl Marx through selected texts from his works. Topics covers will include alienation, the material conception of history, the labour theory of value and French political theory among others. You’ll gain an understanding of concepts essential for advanced study on this course. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Structure of Stars 
   
   
   This module will develop your knowledge of the various physical processes occurring in stars of different types. You’ll use this knowledge to build both mathematical models and your qualitative physical understanding of stellar structure and evolution will be enhanced. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Symmetry and Action Principles in Physics  
   
   
   Symmetry is a powerful notion, both in the development of theories of physical phenomena and in the solution of physical models. In this module the basic aspects of the mathematical language of symmetry will be introduced and applied to a range of physical phenomena, as well as the principle of least action, introduced in The Principles of Dynamics module, will be further developed. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Theoretical Elementary Particle Physics 
   
   
   In this module you’ll have an introduction to theoretical aspects of the standard model of particle physics. You’ll learn about ideas such a symmetry and conservation laws through a number of different topics including relativistic notation, relativistic particles, Feynman diagrams and discrete symmetries among others. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.