Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
  
    From Newton to Einstein  
   
   
    This year-long module aims to introduce core topics in physics which will underpin all subsequent physics modules. You’ll discuss classical mechanics in the language of vectors and the key notion of harmonic motion which is extended to cover wave phenomena. You’ll have an introduction to Einstein's special theory of relativity as well as the basic ideas of electromagnetism and electrical circuits and quantum physics. There will be four hours of lectures and a one hour tutorial weekly plus 2 two-hour workshops throughout the year.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Experimental Physics  
   
   
    In this module you will receive: an introduction to the basic techniques and equipment used in experimental physics; training in the analysis and interpretation of experimental data; opportunities to observe phenomena discussed in theory modules and training in the skills of record keeping and writing scientific reports.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Frontiers in Physics  
   
   
    This module introduces you to major areas of physics beyond those encountered in the core modules, including those at the forefront of modern research. Particular focus is placed on introductions to astronomy, biophysics and nanoscience. Other topics include condensed matter physics, atomic and particle physics and the physics of the environment.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Mathematics for Physics and Astronomy  
   
   
    You will study a selection of mathematical techniques that are useful for analysing physical behaviour. The module topics are: complex numbers, calculus of a single variable, plane geometry and conic sections, ordinary differential equations, calculus of several variables and matrices and matrix algebra.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Computing for Physical Science  
   
   
    In this year-long module you’ll learn the techniques for solving physical problems using MatLab. Topics will include variables and operators, vectors and arrays and plotting 2D and 3D graphs among others. You have a mix of three hour-long lectures, and a number of computer workshops lasting between ninety minutes and three hours throughout the year.
      
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules 
   
  
  
  
    The Quantum World  
   
   
    This module will provide an introduction to the theory and applications of quantum mechanics, a theory that is one of the key achievements of 20th century physics. This module will begin with a discussion of simple systems and develop the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. The module will then extend the formalism to cope with the movement of particles and make links to the material that you have seen in the 'From Newton to Einstein' module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Thermal and Statistical Physics 
   
   
    In this year-long module you’ll learn about the two main themes relating to the description of important physical properties of matter; thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. You’ll discover that they share common features through two hours of lectures weekly and four practical workshops throughout the year.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Classical Fields 
   
   
    In this module, the description of fields will be extended by introducing the mathematics of vector calculus. The mathematics will then be used to provide a framework for describing, understanding and using the laws of electromagnetism. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and have a 90 minute workshop each week.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Wave Phenomena 
   
   
    Many physical systems support the propagation of waves, from the familiar waves on the surface of water to the electromagnetic waves that we perceive as light. The first half of the module will focus on optics: the study of light. Topics to be covered will include: geometrical optics; wave description of light; interference and diffraction; optical interferometry. The second half of the module will introduce more general methods for the discussion of wave propagation, and Fourier methods.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Intermediate Experimental Physics 
   
   
    In this module you will develop your experimental technique and gain experience of some key instruments and methods. The experiments will cover electrical measurements, optics and radiation. You will also learn how to use a computer to control experiments and to record data directly from measuring instruments.
      
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules 
   
  
  
  
    Atoms, Photons and Fundamental Particles 
   
   
    In this year-long module you’ll be introduced to the physics of atoms, nuclei and the fundamental constituents of matter and their interactions. You’ll gain knowledge about the quantum mechanical description of their interactions.  You’ll have two hours weekly of lectures with five 90 minute workshops throughout the year to aide your understanding.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Solid-State Physics 
   
   
    In this year-long module you’ll be introduced to solid state physics. You’ll explore the topics of bonding, crystal structures, band theory, semi-conductors, phonons and magnetism among others. You’ll apply theoretical ideas to the quantitative analysis of physical situations. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures plus five 90 minute workshops throughout the year.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Physics Project A 
   
   
    You will carry out a project drawn from one of several areas of physics. The project may be experimental or theoretical in nature. Many of the projects reflect the research interests of members of academic staff. You’ll work in pairs and will be expected to produce a plan of work and to identify realistic goals for your project. Each pair has a project supervisor responsible for setting the project.
      
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Optional Modules 
   
  
  
   Here is a small sample of modules you will be able to choose from:  
  
    The Structure of Galaxies 
   
   
    This module will develop your current understanding of the various physical processes that dictate the formation, evolution and structure of galaxies. You’ll explore a number of topics including The Milky Way, The Dynamics of Galaxies, Active Galaxies and Galaxy Evolution among others. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures studying this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Biophysics 
   
   
    This module will explore the structure of molecules of biological importance and their mutual interactions and dynamics. Emphasis will be placed on the physical determination of molecular structure and intermolecular forces. Furthermore, techniques to study dynamics on the molecular level will be discussed.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Soft Condensed Matter 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the key concepts in soft condensed matter physics with a focus on the dynamic, structural and kinematic properties of materials falling into this category. You’ll also cover the phenomenology of phase transitions. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos 
   
   
    In this module you will develop your knowledge of classical mechanics of simple linear behaviour to include the behaviour of complex nonlinear dynamics. You’ll learn about the way in which nonlinear deterministic systems can exhibit essentially random behaviour because of sensitivity relating to initial conditions. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    The Structure of Stars 
   
   
    This module will develop your knowledge of the various physical processes occurring in stars of different types. You’ll use this knowledge to build both mathematical models and your qualitative physical understanding of stellar structure and evolution will be enhanced. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Force and Function at the Nanoscale 
   
   
    This module will provide an introduction to how forces at the nanoscale are radically different to those observed in macroscopic systems and how they can be exploited in nanometre-scale processes and devices. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and have two practical workshops during the semester.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Semiconductor Physics 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the physical properties of semiconductors and low-dimensional systems, such as quantum wells, wires and dots. The aim is to explain the physics that underlies optical and transport properties of these structures and their applications in advanced technologies. This course is structured in two main parts; the foundation of quantum mechanics and solid state physics needed to describe a low dimensional system. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Functional Medical Imaging 
   
   
    The techniques for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy (MRS) are explored. You’ll be introduced to the brain imaging technique of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), giving an overview of the physics involved in this technique. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures. 
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Theoretical Elementary Particle Physics 
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to the key theoretical ideas of elementary particle physics, such as symmetry and conservation laws, and build the foundations for a mathematical description of particle properties and interactions. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Scientific Computing 
   
   
    This module aims to provide you with the skills necessary to use computational methods in the solution of non-trivial problems in physics and astronomy. You’ll also sharpen your programming skills through a three hour computing class and one hour of lectures per week.