Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
  Typical Year One Modules
   
   
  
  
  
    Mathematics for Physics and Astronomy 
   
   
   You will study a selection of mathematical techniques that are useful for analysing physical behaviour. The module topics are: complex numbers, calculus of a single variable, plane geometry and conic sections, ordinary differential equations, calculus of several variables and matrices and matrix algebra. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    From Newton to Einstein 
   
   
   This year-long module aims to introduce core topics in physics which will underpin all subsequent physics modules. You’ll discuss classical mechanics in the language of vectors and the key notion of harmonic motion which is extended to cover wave phenomena. You’ll have an introduction to Einstein's special theory of relativity as well as the basic ideas of electromagnetism and electrical circuits and quantum physics. There will be four hours of lectures and a one hour tutorial weekly plus 2 two-hour workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Experimental Physics  
   
   
   In this module you will receive: an introduction to the basic techniques and equipment used in experimental physics; training in the analysis and interpretation of experimental data; opportunities to observe phenomena discussed in theory modules and training in the skills of record keeping and writing scientific reports. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Computing for Physical Science
    
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll learn the techniques for solving physical problems using MatLab. Topics will include variables and operators, vectors and arrays and plotting 2D and 3D graphs among others. You have a mix of three hour-long lectures, and a number of computer workshops lasting between ninety minutes and three hours throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Physics 
   
   
   This year-long module will train you in the mathematical modelling of physical processes. You’ll be trained in topics such as basic statistics and errors, dimensional analysis, curve sketching, orders of magnitude and estimates and integrating problems in physics among others. You’ll have an hour per week of lectures plus a number of 90 minute workshops throughout the year to assist in your learning. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Appropriate Language Modules 
   
  
    You will choose from French, German or Spanish language modules appropriate to your level of understanding. These are available from beginners' level to fluency. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   
   The Quantum World 
    
   
   
   This module will provide an introduction to the theory and applications of quantum mechanics, a theory that is one of the key achievements of 20th century physics. This module will begin with a discussion of simple systems and develop the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. The module will then extend the formalism to cope with the movement of particles and make links to the material that you have seen in the 'From Newton to Einstein' module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Thermal and Statistical Physics 
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll learn about the two main themes relating to the description of important physical properties of matter; thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. You’ll discover that they share common features through two hours of lectures weekly and four practical workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Classical Fields 
   
   
   In this module, the description of fields will be extended by introducing the mathematics of vector calculus. The mathematics will then be used to provide a framework for describing, understanding and using the laws of electromagnetism. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and have a 90 minute workshop each week. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Wave Phenomena 
   
   
   Many physical systems support the propagation of waves, from the familiar waves on the surface of water to the electromagnetic waves that we perceive as light. The first half of the module will focus on optics: the study of light. Topics to be covered will include: geometrical optics; wave description of light; interference and diffraction; optical interferometry. The second half of the module will introduce more general methods for the discussion of wave propagation, and Fourier methods. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Intermediate Experimental Physics 
   
   
   In this module you will develop your experimental technique and gain experience of some key instruments and methods. The experiments will cover electrical measurements, optics and radiation. You will also learn how to use a computer to control experiments and to record data directly from measuring instruments.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Appropriate Language Modules 
   
   
   You will continue with your chosen language  
   to raise your skills to stage three in the University's system. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
  This year will be spent studying physics at a European university. Module selection will be made in consultation with your host University. For more information, please contact the UG Admissions tutor, Julie Kenney, here.  
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
  
    Atoms, Photons and Fundamental Particles 
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll be introduced to the physics of atoms, nuclei and the fundamental constituents of matter and their interactions. You’ll gain knowledge about the quantum mechanical description of their interactions.  You’ll have two hours weekly of lectures with five 90 minute workshops throughout the year to aide your understanding. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Solid-State Physics
    
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll be introduced to solid state physics. You’ll explore the topics of bonding, crystal structures, band theory, semi-conductors, phonons and magnetism among others. You’ll apply theoretical ideas to the quantitative analysis of physical situations. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures plus five 90 minute workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Physics Project A 
   
   
    You will carry out a project drawn from one of several areas of physics. The project may be experimental or theoretical in nature. Many of the projects reflect the research interests of members of academic staff. You’ll work in pairs and will be expected to produce a plan of work and to identify realistic goals for your project. Each pair has a project supervisor responsible for setting the project.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    Appropriate Language Modules 
   
   
   You will continue with your chosen language studies. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Optional Modules  
  
  
  
    Introduction to Cosmology 
   
   
   In this module you’ll be introduced to modern cosmology – the scientific study of the Universe as a whole. Topics will cover recent observations and theoretical developments including Friedmann models, the thermal history of the Big Bang and classical cosmological tests among others. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures along with two 2 hour workshops to assist your learning whilst studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    From Accelerators to Medical Imaging  
   
   
   In this module you’ll learn about the radiation source and detectors with a focus on those used in medical imaging applications. You’ll be introduced to the experimental techniques of nuclear physics and their applications in medical diagnosis and therapy. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Scientific Computing 
   
   
   This module aims to provide you with the skills necessary to use computational methods in the solution of non-trivial problems in physics and astronomy. You’ll also sharpen your programming skills through a three hour computing class and one hour of lectures per week.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Extreme Astrophysics 
   
   
   In this module you’ll explore the physical processes involved in extreme and explosive high-energy events known in astronomy and the relative importance of different processes in different situations. You’ll make models of extreme astrophysical sources and environments based on physical theory. You’ll also learn to interpret observational data according to relevant physical theory. You’ll have two hours of lectures per week studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Imaging and Manipulation at the Nanoscale 
   
   
   This module will introduce you to the basic ideas of scanning probe microscopy and the way in which scanning probe systems such as scanning tunnelling microscopes (STM) can be used to carry out nanoscale manipulation of solid surfaces. Throughout the course images from the current research literature will be introduced to inform you of the range of possible applications of these techniques. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Theoretical Elementary Particle Physics 
   
   
   In this module you’ll have an introduction to theoretical aspects of the standard model of particle physics. You’ll learn about ideas such a symmetry and conservation laws through a number of different topics including relativistic notation, relativistic particles, Feynman diagrams and discrete symmetries among others. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Structure of Stars 
   
   
   This module will develop your knowledge of the various physical processes occurring in stars of different types. You’ll use this knowledge to build both mathematical models and your qualitative physical understanding of stellar structure and evolution will be enhanced. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Force and Function at the Nanoscale 
   
   
   This module will provide an introduction to how forces at the nanoscale are radically different to those observed in macroscopic systems and how they can be exploited in nanometre-scale processes and devices. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and have two practical workshops during the semester. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Structure of Galaxies 
   
   
   This module will develop your current understanding of the various physical processes that dictate the formation, evolution and structure of galaxies. You’ll explore a number of topics including The Milky Way, The Dynamics of Galaxies, Active Galaxies and Galaxy Evolution among others. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Symmetry and Action Principles in Physics 
   
   
   Symmetry is a powerful notion, both in the development of theories of physical phenomena and in the solution of physical models. In this module the basic aspects of the mathematical language of symmetry will be introduced and applied to a range of physical phenomena, as well as the principle of least action, introduced in The Principles of Dynamics module, will be further developed.