Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
  Typical Year One Modules
   
   
  
  
   
   Mathematics for Physics and Astronomy
    
   
   
   You will study a selection of mathematical techniques that are useful for analysing physical behaviour. The module topics are: complex numbers, calculus of a single variable, plane geometry and conic sections, ordinary differential equations, calculus of several variables and matrices and matrix algebra.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    From Newton to Einstein 
   
   
   This year-long module aims to introduce core topics in physics which will underpin all subsequent physics modules. You’ll discuss classical mechanics in the language of vectors and the key notion of harmonic motion which is extended to cover wave phenomena. You’ll have an introduction to Einstein's special theory of relativity as well as the basic ideas of electromagnetism and electrical circuits and quantum physics. There will be four hours of lectures and a one hour tutorial weekly plus 2 two-hour workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Experimental Physics 
   
   
   In this module you will receive: an introduction to the basic techniques and equipment used in experimental physics; training in the analysis and interpretation of experimental data; opportunities to observe phenomena discussed in theory modules and training in the skills of record keeping and writing scientific reports. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     Quantitative Physics 
    
   
   
   This year-long module will train you in the mathematical modelling of physical processes. You’ll be trained in topics such as basic statistics and errors, dimensional analysis, curve sketching, orders of magnitude and estimates and integrating problems in physics among others. You’ll have an hour per week of lectures plus a number of 90 minute workshops throughout the year to assist in your learning. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Computing for Physical Science 
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll learn the techniques for solving physical problems using MatLab. Topics will include variables and operators, vectors and arrays and plotting 2D and 3D graphs among others. You have a mix of three hour-long lectures, and a number of computer workshops lasting between ninety minutes and three hours throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Appropriate language module 
   
   
   You will choose from French, German or Spanish language modules appropriate to your level of understanding. These are available from beginners' level to fluency.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules 
   
  
  
  
    The Quantum World 
   
   
   This module will provide an introduction to the theory and applications of quantum mechanics, a theory that is one of the key achievements of 20th century physics. This module will begin with a discussion of simple systems and develop the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. The module will then extend the formalism to cope with the movement of particles and make links to the material that you have seen in the 'From Newton to Einstein' module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Thermal and Statistical Physics 
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll learn about the two main themes relating to the description of important physical properties of matter; thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. You’ll discover that they share common features through two hours of lectures weekly and four practical workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Classical Fields 
   
   
   In this module, the description of fields will be extended by introducing the mathematics of vector calculus. The mathematics will then be used to provide a framework for describing, understanding and using the laws of electromagnetism. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and have a 90 minute workshop each week. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Wave Phenomena 
   
   
   Many physical systems support the propagation of waves, from the familiar waves on the surface of water to the electromagnetic waves that we perceive as light. The first half of the module will focus on optics: the study of light. Topics to be covered will include: geometrical optics; wave description of light; interference and diffraction; optical interferometry. The second half of the module will introduce more general methods for the discussion of wave propagation, and Fourier methods. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     Intermediate Experimental Physics 
    
   
   
   In this module you will develop your experimental technique and gain experience of some key instruments and methods. The experiments will cover electrical measurements, optics and radiation. You will also learn how to use a computer to control experiments and to record data directly from measuring instruments. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Appropriate language module 
   
   
   You will continue with your chosen language  
   to raise your skills to stage three in the University's system.   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
  This year will be spent studying physics at a European university. The module selection will be made in consultation with your host university. 
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules
   
   
  
  
  
    Research Techniques in Astronomy 
   
   
   This module develops a range of modern astronomical techniques through student-centered approaches to topical research problems. You’ll cover a range of topics related to ongoing research in astronomy and astrophysics, and will encompass theoretical and observational approaches. This module is based on individual and group student-led activities involving the solution of topical problems including written reports and exercises, and a project. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Light and Matter 
   
  
    This module will extend previous work in the areas of atomic and optical physics to cover modern topics in the area of quantum effects in light-matter interactions. Some basic material will be introduced in six staff-led seminars and you’ll have around two hours of lectures and student-led workshops each week. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Physics Research Project 
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll aim to solve a theoretical or practical problem. You’ll spend semester one researching your chosen project and carry out your practical research in semester two. You’ll have the opportunity to work with external parties such as an industrial laboratory, school or hospital if appropriate to your topic. You’ll see your supervisor for one hours per week in tutorials to assist you during this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Appropriate Language Module 
   
   
   You will continue with your chosen language studies. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Optional Modules
   
   
  
  
  
    Gravity 
   
   
   This module provides an introduction to the modern theory of gravitation: Einstein's general theory of relativity. This module is based on a regular series of two 1-hour lectures per week supplemented by a 2 hour workshop once a fortnight. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Magnetic Resonance Techniques 
   
   
   In this module you’ll receive an overview of spin dynamics and an introduction to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and related techniques. You’ll gain knowledge about the key ideas, techniques and instrumentation used in this field and how they are applied in a range of situations. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Modern Cosmology 
   
   
   This module introduces you to the key ideas behind modern approaches to our understanding of the role of inflation in the early and late universe, in particular through the formation of structure, the generation of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background radiation, and the origin of dark energy. You’ll study through a series of staff lectures and student-led workshops. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Imaging and Image Processing 
   
   
   This module aims to provide you with a working knowledge of the basic techniques of image processing. The major topics covered will include: acquisition of images, image representation, resolution and quantization, image compression and non-Fourier enhancement techniques, among others. You’ll spend around four hours in lectures, 8 hours in seminars and have a one hour tutorial each week.