Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.   
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
  
    Mathematics for Physics and Astronomy  
   
   
   You will study a selection of mathematical techniques that are useful for analysing physical behaviour. The module topics are: complex numbers, calculus of a single variable, plane geometry and conic sections, ordinary differential equations, calculus of several variables and matrices and matrix algebra. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    From Newton to Einstein  
   
   
   This year-long module aims to introduce core topics in physics which will underpin all subsequent physics modules. You’ll discuss classical mechanics in the language of vectors and the key notion of harmonic motion which is extended to cover wave phenomena. You’ll have an introduction to Einstein's special theory of relativity as well as the basic ideas of electromagnetism and electrical circuits and quantum physics. There will be four hours of lectures and a one hour tutorial weekly plus 2 two-hour workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Experimental Physics  
   
   
   In this module you will receive: an introduction to the basic techniques and equipment used in experimental physics; training in the analysis and interpretation of experimental data; opportunities to observe phenomena discussed in theory modules and training in the skills of record keeping and writing scientific reports. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantitative Physics  
   
   
   This year-long module will train you in the mathematical modelling of physical processes. You’ll be trained in topics such as basic statistics and errors, dimensional analysis, curve sketching, orders of magnitude and estimates and integrating problems in physics among others. You’ll have an hour per week of lectures plus a number of 90 minute workshops throughout the year to assist in your learning. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Computing for Physical Science  
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll learn the techniques for solving physical problems using MatLab. Topics will include variables and operators, vectors and arrays and plotting 2D and 3D graphs among others. You have a mix of three hour-long lectures, and a number of computer workshops lasting between ninety minutes and three hours throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules 
   
  
  
  
    Health Physics 
   
   
   
     Radiation is a term which can cover many different phenomena and in the public eye radiation can often be seen as a danger. In this module you will learn how physicists can harness the health benefits of using radiation, as well as measuring and controlling levels of radiation in the environment.  You’ll examine the biological effects of radiation and the principles which govern safe exposure limits. Around two hours per week will be spent in lectures supplemented by student-led workshop sessions.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Quantum World  
   
   
   This module will provide an introduction to the theory and applications of quantum mechanics, a theory that is one of the key achievements of 20th century physics. This module will begin with a discussion of simple systems and develop the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. The module will then extend the formalism to cope with the movement of particles and make links to the material that you have seen in the 'From Newton to Einstein' module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Thermal and Statistical Physics  
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll learn about the two main themes relating to the description of important physical properties of matter; thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. You’ll discover that they share common features through two hours of lectures weekly and four practical workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Intermediate Experimental Physics  
   
   
   In this module you will develop your experimental technique and gain experience of some key instruments and methods. The experiments will cover electrical measurements, optics and radiation. You will also learn how to use a computer to control experiments and to record data directly from measuring instruments. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     Molecular Biophysics  
    
   
   
   This module will explore the structure of molecules of biological importance and their mutual interactions and dynamics. Emphasis will be placed on the physical determination of molecular structure and intermolecular forces. Furthermore, techniques to study dynamics on the molecular level will be discussed. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
  
    From Accelerators to Medical Imaging  
   
   
   In this module you’ll learn about the radiation source and detectors with a focus on those used in medical imaging applications. You’ll be introduced to the experimental techniques of nuclear physics and their applications in medical diagnosis and therapy. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantum Dynamics Physics Project B 
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll carry out a project drawn from one of several areas of physics, the project may be experimental or theoretical in nature. You’ll work in pairs and have a staff supervisor to monitor your progress. You’ll attend a weekly one hour lecture and have a one-hour progress meeting with your supervisor each week as well as workshops to complete this module.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Atoms, Photons and Fundamental Particles  
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll be introduced to the physics of atoms, nuclei and the fundamental constituents of matter and their interactions. You’ll gain knowledge about the quantum mechanical description of their interactions.  You’ll have two hours weekly of lectures with five 90 minute workshops throughout the year to aide your understanding. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Solid-State Physics  
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll be introduced to solid state physics. You’ll explore the topics of bonding, crystal structures, band theory, semi-conductors, phonons and magnetism among others. You’ll apply theoretical ideas to the quantitative analysis of physical situations. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures plus five 90 minute workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Functional Medical Imaging  
   
   
   The techniques for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy (MRS) are explored. You’ll be introduced to the brain imaging technique of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), giving an overview of the physics involved in this technique. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
  
    Magnetic Resonance Techniques 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll receive an overview of spin dynamics and an introduction to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and related techniques. You’ll gain knowledge about the key ideas, techniques and instrumentation used in this field and how they are applied in a range of situations. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Physics Research Project  
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll aim to solve a theoretical or practical problem. You’ll spend semester one researching your chosen project and carry out your practical research in semester two. You’ll have the opportunity to work with external parties such as an industrial laboratory, school or hospital if appropriate to your topic. You’ll see your supervisor for one hours per week in tutorials to assist you during this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     Imaging and Image Processing  
    
   
   
   This module aims to provide you with a working knowledge of the basic techniques of image processing. The major topics covered will include: acquisition of images, image representation, resolution and quantization, image compression and non-Fourier enhancement techniques, among others. You’ll spend around four hours in lectures, 8 hours in seminars and have a one hour tutorial each week.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Optional Modules  
  
  
   Here is a small sample of modules you will be able to choose from:  
      
   
   Introduction to Cosmology  
   
   
   In this module you’ll be introduced to modern cosmology – the scientific study of the Universe as a whole. Topics will cover recent observations and theoretical developments including Friedmann models, the thermal history of the Big Bang and classical cosmological tests among others. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures along with two 2 hour workshops to assist your learning whilst studying this module.   
   
  
      
   
   
   Atmospheric Physics  
   
   
   In this module you’ll explore the theoretical aspect of atmospheric physics. Topics will include planetary atmosphere, troposphere, solar radiation and the Energy budget, radiation transfer and Photochemistry among others. You’ll have two hours of lectures per week studying this module.   
   
  
      
   
   
   Scientific Computing  
   
   
   This module aims to provide you with the skills necessary to use computational methods in the solution of non-trivial problems in physics and astronomy. You’ll also sharpen your programming skills through a three hour computing class and one hour of lectures per week.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantum Coherent Phenomena  
   
   
   This module will introduce you to a range of physical phenomena which exhibit macroscopic quantum coherence including Bose condensation in cold atomic gases, superfluidity in Helium-4 and superconductivity in metals and alloys. You’ll discuss their common features and general theoretical ideas as well as some of their applications. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Force and Function at the Nanoscale  
   
   
   This module will provide an introduction to how forces at the nanoscale are radically different to those observed in macroscopic systems and how they can be exploited in nanometre-scale processes and devices. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and have two practical workshops during the semester. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Principles of Dynamics  
   
   
   In this module you’ll be introduced to the mathematical language for discussing extreme problems. The formulations of mechanics due to Lagrange and Hamilton will be described and techniques for the solutions of the consequent equations of motion will be discussed. You’ll learn the underlying principles of dynamics and develop techniques for the solution of dynamical problems. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Structure of Galaxies  
   
   
   This module will develop your current understanding of the various physical processes that dictate the formation, evolution and structure of galaxies. You’ll explore a number of topics including The Milky Way, The Dynamics of Galaxies, Active Galaxies and Galaxy Evolution among others. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Structure of Stars  
   
   
   This module will develop your knowledge of the various physical processes occurring in stars of different types. You’ll use this knowledge to build both mathematical models and your qualitative physical understanding of stellar structure and evolution will be enhanced. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Symmetry and Action Principles in Physics  
   
   
   Symmetry is a powerful notion, both in the development of theories of physical phenomena and in the solution of physical models. In this module the basic aspects of the mathematical language of symmetry will be introduced and applied to a range of physical phenomena, as well as the principle of least action, introduced in The Principles of Dynamics module, will be further developed.