Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.   
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
  
    Mathematics for Physics and Astronomy  
   
   
   You will study a selection of mathematical techniques that are useful for analysing physical behaviour. The module topics are: complex numbers, calculus of a single variable, plane geometry and conic sections, ordinary differential equations, calculus of several variables and matrices and matrix algebra. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    From Newton to Einstein  
   
   
   This year-long module aims to introduce core topics in physics which will underpin all subsequent physics modules. You’ll discuss classical mechanics in the language of vectors and the key notion of harmonic motion which is extended to cover wave phenomena. You’ll have an introduction to Einstein's special theory of relativity as well as the basic ideas of electromagnetism and electrical circuits and quantum physics. There will be four hours of lectures and a one hour tutorial weekly plus 2 two-hour workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Experimental Physics  
   
   
   In this module you will receive: an introduction to the basic techniques and equipment used in experimental physics; training in the analysis and interpretation of experimental data; opportunities to observe phenomena discussed in theory modules and training in the skills of record keeping and writing scientific reports. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Frontiers in Physics  
   
   
   This module introduces you to major areas of physics beyond those encountered in the core modules, including those at the forefront of modern research. Particular focus is placed on introductions to astronomy, biophysics and nanoscience. Other topics include condensed matter physics, atomic and particle physics and the physics of the environment. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Computing for Physical Science 
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll learn the techniques for solving physical problems using MatLab. Topics will include variables and operators, vectors and arrays and plotting 2D and 3D graphs among others. You have a mix of three hour-long lectures, and a number of computer workshops lasting between ninety minutes and three hours throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
  
    Force and Function at the Nanoscale  
   
   
   This module will provide an introduction to how forces at the nanoscale are radically different to those observed in macroscopic systems and how they can be exploited in nanometre-scale processes and devices. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and have two practical workshops during the semester. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Quantum World  
   
   
   This module will provide an introduction to the theory and applications of quantum mechanics, a theory that is one of the key achievements of 20th century physics. This module will begin with a discussion of simple systems and develop the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. The module will then extend the formalism to cope with the movement of particles and make links to the material that you have seen in the 'From Newton to Einstein' module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Thermal and Statistical Physics  
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll learn about the two main themes relating to the description of important physical properties of matter; thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. You’ll discover that they share common features through two hours of lectures weekly and four practical workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Wave Phenomena  
   
   
   Many physical systems support the propagation of waves, from the familiar waves on the surface of water to the electromagnetic waves that we perceive as light. The first half of the module will focus on optics: the study of light. Topics to be covered will include: geometrical optics; wave description of light; interference and diffraction; optical interferometry. The second half of the module will introduce more general methods for the discussion of wave propagation, and Fourier methods. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Biophysics  
   
   
   This module will explore the structure of molecules of biological importance and their mutual interactions and dynamics. Emphasis will be placed on the physical determination of molecular structure and intermolecular forces. Furthermore, techniques to study dynamics on the molecular level will be discussed. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
  
    Soft Condensed Matter  
   
   
   This module will introduce you to the key concepts in soft condensed matter physics with a focus on the dynamic, structural and kinematic properties of materials falling into this category. You’ll also cover the phenomenology of phase transitions. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantum Dynamics  
   
   
   In this module you’ll develop your knowledge of quantum theory with a focus on how quantum systems evolve over time. You’ll enhance your knowledge of mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics as well as introducing important physical models and calculation techniques. You’ll cover the dynamics of operators and wavefunctions which can be applied to time-dependant problems. These ideas will then be used to explore some of the quantum dynamical properties of the harmonic oscillator and the two-level system. You’ll have two hours of lectures per week plus two ninety-minute workshops studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Atoms, Photons and Fundamental Particles 
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll be introduced to the physics of atoms, nuclei and the fundamental constituents of matter and their interactions. You’ll gain knowledge about the quantum mechanical description of their interactions.  You’ll have two hours weekly of lectures with five 90 minute workshops throughout the year to aide your understanding. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Solid-State Physics  
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll be introduced to solid state physics. You’ll explore the topics of bonding, crystal structures, band theory, semi-conductors, phonons and magnetism among others. You’ll apply theoretical ideas to the quantitative analysis of physical situations. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures plus five 90 minute workshops throughout the year. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Imaging and Manipulation at the Nanoscale  
   
   
   This module will introduce you to the basic ideas of scanning probe microscopy and the way in which scanning probe systems such as scanning tunnelling microscopes (STM) can be used to carry out nanoscale manipulation of solid surfaces. Throughout the course images from the current research literature will be introduced to inform you of the range of possible applications of these techniques. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
  
    Physics Research Project  
   
   
   In this year-long module you’ll aim to solve a theoretical or practical problem. You’ll spend semester one researching your chosen project and carry out your practical research in semester two. You’ll have the opportunity to work with external parties such as an industrial laboratory, school or hospital if appropriate to your topic. You’ll see your supervisor for one hours per week in tutorials to assist you during this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Science Technology and Business  
   
   
   This module will introduce you to the importance of, and the processes involved in the commercialisation of science and technology. The content of the course is highly relevant in the current climate where Government is placing much evidence on the wealth creation process. You’ll have 11 ninety minute lectures plus 2 one-hour tutorials to cover material in this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Light and Matter  
   
   
   This module will extend previous work in the areas of atomic and optical physics to cover modern topics in the area of quantum effects in light-matter interactions. Some basic material will be introduced in six staff-led seminars and you’ll have around two hours of lectures and student-led workshops each week. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Optional Modules  
  
  
   Here is a small sample of modules you will be able to choose from:  
  
    From Accelerators to Medical Imaging  
   
   
   In this module you’ll learn about the radiation source and detectors with a focus on those used in medical imaging applications. You’ll be introduced to the experimental techniques of nuclear physics and their applications in medical diagnosis and therapy. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Scientific Computing  
   
   
   This module aims to provide you with the skills necessary to use computational methods in the solution of non-trivial problems in physics and astronomy. You’ll also sharpen your programming skills through a three hour computing class and one hour of lectures per week.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Quantum Coherent Phenomena  
   
   
   
     This module will introduce you to a range of physical phenomena which exhibit macroscopic quantum coherence including Bose condensation in cold atomic gases, superfluidity in Helium-4 and superconductivity in metals and alloys. You’ll discuss their common features and general theoretical ideas as well as some of their applications. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Extreme Astrophysics  
   
   
    
     In this module you’ll explore the physical processes involved in extreme and explosive high-energy events known in astronomy and the relative importance of different processes in different situations. You’ll make models of extreme astrophysical sources and environments based on physical theory. You’ll also learn to interpret observational data according to relevant physical theory. You’ll have two hours of lectures per week studying this module.
       
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Structure of Stars  
   
   
   This module will develop your knowledge of the various physical processes occurring in stars of different types. You’ll use this knowledge to build both mathematical models and your qualitative physical understanding of stellar structure and evolution will be enhanced. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Health Physics 
   
   
   Radiation is a term which can cover many different phenomena and in the public eye radiation can often be seen as a danger. In this module you will learn how physicists can harness the health benefits of using radiation, as well as measuring and controlling levels of radiation in the environment.  You’ll examine the biological effects of radiation and the principles which govern safe exposure limits. Around two hours per week will be spent in lectures supplemented by student-led workshop sessions. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Imaging and Image Processing 
   
   
   
     This module aims to provide you with a working knowledge of the basic techniques of image processing. The major topics covered will include: acquisition of images, image representation, resolution and quantization, image compression and non-Fourier enhancement techniques, among others. You’ll spend around four hours in lectures, 8 hours in seminars and have a one hour tutorial each week.