Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff. They're also shaped by new developments in industry and as a consequence, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Engineering Mathematics 1 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the algebra of complex numbers providing a key mathematical tool for analysis of linear mathematical and engineering problems. You’ll have one 3-hour lecture and workshops each weekwhere you’ll study the complexity of solving general systems of equations using matrix techniques and review the calculus of a single variable.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Integrated Design in Architecture 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the principle of a holistic and integrated approach to building design. Firstly, you’ll learn about the notion of thinking architecture, the fundamental principles of design and drawing skills and typologies as key areas of study. Then you’ll focus on methodology and approaches relevant to the studio comprehensive design project with a more intensified examination of topics such as light, narrative and sustainability. For this module you’ll have a one 1-hour lecture per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Science for Architects 1 
   
   
    Introducing you to the environmental agenda as it applies to the architectural profession, you’ll explore the key bioclimatic strategies used to maintain appropriate conditions for the occupants of buildings thus tying together occupant comfort, building schedule and climate. You’ll have a two hour lecture per week using both physical modelling and computer simulation techniques to gain a better understanding of the strategies involved and their relationship with building design.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Tectonics 1 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the technology, materials and techniques used in constructing buildings and the importance of considering it as an integral part of the design process. Through two hour weekly lectures you’ll conduct practical structural modelling exercises and develop a basic understanding of the qualitative behaviour of structures and the interaction between structural form and the loads that they have to carry.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Architectural Humanities I: History of Architecture 
   
   
    This module offers you an introduction to the history of architecture from ancient times to the present day . A two hour weekly lecture aims to familiarise you with major architectural typologies and the social and technological changes that brought them into being.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Design Studios 1A 
   
   
    This studio-based module introduces you to basic design, drafting, model making and drawing skills. You’ll have two weekly 6-hour design practicals with the semester finishing with the design of a small building that will test your understanding and application of the knowledge achieved.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Design Studio 1B 
   
   
    This studio-based module develops your basic design, drafting, model making and drawing skills. You’ll have two weekly 6-hour practicals introduce you to historical precedents and computer aided drawing programmes. These exercises will feed into a small comprehensive design project of a public building.  
   
  
      
   
  
    People Buildings Landscape 
   
   
    The overall aim of this module is to give you an understanding of the impact that the built environment has on those who inhabits its space. Through a two hour lecture each week you’ll broaden your awareness of built environment design issues, illustrate how design decisions impact more broadly on environmental, economic, social and experiential issues and study behavioural psychology and its influence on built environment design.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
   
   Engineering Mathematics 2 
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to techniques for solving selected first-order and second-order differential equations relevant to the analysis of generic engineering problems, spending around three hours per week in lectures and workshops.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Electricity and Built Environment 
   
   
    You’ll be given an understanding of the role that electricity plays in controlling the environment within buildings and the wider built environment through two hours of lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Integrated Design in Architecture 2A  
   
   
    Following on from the key principles introduced in the year one module - Integrated Design in Architecture, you’ll further develop your communication and research skills which will underpin your work in both the theorisation and practice of architecture. Through one hour weekly lectures you’ll explore the research methodologies and skills needed to identify and synthesise relevant and accurate information as well visual communication skills focusing on CAD programs, where skills will be developed through workshops and self-directed exercises.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Tectonics 2A 
   
   
    Dealing with small to medium-scale buildings, You’ll build on knowledge acquired in Tectonics 1, focusing on structural systems, building elements, material, components, connections, construction methods and detailing. During 2 hours of lecture each week, emphasis is placed on how constituent parts come together to construct building entities through investigation and analysis of structural principles, detail, material composition and performance of primary building elements.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Architectural Humanities II 
   
   
    This course provides a historical, cultural and philosophical context to the major contemporary debates in architecture today giving understanding of architecture's potential as both a useful and meaningful cultural activity. Key issues from the history of philosophy will be examined alongside a range of building case-studies in order to develop a series of alternative interpretive frameworks through which buildings may be analysed, criticised, debated and understood. For this module you’ll a one 2-hour lecture per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Sciences for Architects 2 
   
   
    Building upon the themes covered in the Year 1 module Environmental Science for Architects 1, this module looks more specifically at the flows of energy that occur out with and within buildings and how these relate to and integrate with some of the numerous systems employed that may help with their control. The module is delivered as eight inter-related teaching blocks and is delivered through 2 hours of lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Fluid Mechanics and the Built Environment 1 
   
   
    Building on Level 1 design modules, you’ll be introduced to engineering concepts that inform and enrich the environmental performance of buildings. You’ll cover the fundamentals of fluid mechanics (fluid properties, hydrostatics, fluid dynamics) and then explore some of these through the analysis of flow through piped water systems and the design of hot and cold water services. You’ll spend around three to four hours in lectures and workshops studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Services Design 1 
   
   
    This module gives you an introduction to the environmental services systems common to many simple buildings. Developing awareness of the systems, through eight hours per week of practicals workshops and lectures, you’ll be introduced to the techniques used to select and size systems, explores issues associated with the integration of these systems and be given an opportunity to practice the fundamental skills used by system installers.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Design Studio 2 
   
   
    This studio-based module aims to develop your basic skills and approaches to architectural design through a series of design projects. During 6 hours of studio classes each week, you’ll learn the fundamentals of place making, organisational discipline and the composition of plan and section in medium scale project work. You’ll begin at a more advanced level to inform design through an understanding of environmental & tectonic influences. This module aims to practice and achieve the General Attributes of the ARB/RIBA Criteria.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Simulation and Design 
   
   
    Computer laboratory sessions are used to introduce the tools and acquire basic competence in their use. Their use in project work provides an opportunity for you to  develop an enhanced ability to apply these tools to understanding environmental strategies in existing buildings and to confirm strategies in new designs. You’ll spend around two hours a week in computer classes studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer 1 
   
   
    This module introduces the principles of theromdoynamics and the thermodynamics concepts relevant to applications in building environment engineering. Some of the  topics covered include:; thermal properties; thermodynamic systems; ; work and heat transfer processes; perfect (ideal) gases; 1st Law and 2nd Law of thermodynamics; steam table and Ranking cycle. You’ll spend around four hours per week in lectures and workshops studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Differential Equations and Calculus for Engineers 
   
  
    You’ll learn techniques for solving selected classes of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) relevant to the analysis of engineering topics This module also provides the basic calculus to help analyse engineering problems in two- or three-dimensions and special solutions of partial differential equations relevant to engineering applications. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and workshops.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Study Dissertation 
   
   
    This is an individual project module which seeks to develop the ability to plan, execute and report on a piece of work at a professional level. The detailed content of the project is a matter for discussion between you and your supervisor. However, the project will normally involve a mixture of experimental, theoretical and computational work together with a relevant literature review.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Design Studio 3 
   
   
    This module aims to further develop your ability to successfully design a multi-spatial building of modest scale. Through 12 hours of studio classes you’ll demonstrate an awareness of the relationship between site, brief, cultural context, the environment, spatial qualities and aesthetics and technical elements and practice to respond in a more comprehensive manner through the project design.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Services Design 2 
   
   
    Introducing you to large scale building services, principally natural ventilation, air conditioning and other environmental control systems, you’ll discuss the reasons for resorting to and avoiding A/C and the consequent design issues.  You’ll also cover some of the following topics including: Assessments of heat gains and losses, thermal comfort and relevant climatic data system types and associated secondary plant introduced; plant selection, location, sizing and design alternatives discussed. For this module you’ll have a one 2 hour lecture per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer 2 
   
   
    This module develops and advances the principles of thermodynamics and how these are applied in the expression and solution of simple engineering problems as well as thermofluids and its application within building environment engineering. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and two hours per week in practicals studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Integrated Design in Architecture 3 
   
   
    This module continues to develop your architectural understanding and skills through a hands-on approach to the construction, documentation and testing of buildings and materials. A series of site visits and workshops as well as supplementary one hour lectures develop the idea of integrated building design and construction. Module activities will typically include training on CAD software, materials workshops, environmental design analysis skills, and construction site visits. Accurate, succinct and reflective documentation of activities through a combination of images, diagrams and text will be encouraged.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Tectonics 3 
   
   
    This module aims to increase knowledge of building technology by focusing on components, connections, structural systems and construction techniques related to medium-scale and large buildings and their sustainable development. Study of the theory of structures reinforced by practical studio based design projects will enable students to quantify forces and actions in structural systems. The module will also increase structural understanding by the examination of some advanced structural forms. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Fluid Mechanics and the Built Environment 2 
   
   
    This module aims to develop an awareness of fluid mechanics and its application within building environment engineering and to teach you the fundamental principles of fluid mechanics and their application to practical problems in building environment design. You’ll spend around four hours per week in lectures and workshops studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Four Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Integrated Environmental Design 
   
   
    You’ll explore the steps involved in the identification of appropriate environmental strategies for integration within the context of an overall building design and practice the development of these ideas from scheme design to detailed design stage. Emphasis will be placed on developing strategies to a level appropriate to the relevant design stage and the effective communication of the strategy to both technical and non-technical audiences at each stage. You’ll have a one 1-hour tutorial each week to support your learning during this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Architectural Humanities III: Theories in Contemporary Architecture 
   
   
    This course explores contemporary architecture in relation to major social, economic, political, ecological, and technological transformations after the Second World War. A wide range of topics including consumerism, globalization, mass media, cultural identities and changing economic structures are discussed in terms of their role in shaping architectural theory, practice, and built environment. Two hours of lectures each week employ building case studies, film excerpts, and assigned readings to analyse key concepts.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Integrated Design in Architecture 3 
   
   
    This module encourages the notion that ‘integrated design’ is a holistic practice, in which technical issues from the fields of structural engineering, construction and environmental design inform the development of studio projects in the related module Architecture Design Studio 3. Teaching content is delivered through a combination of lectures, skill based workshops and technical tutorials.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Design Studio 4 
   
   
    This studio-based module aims to develop your skills and approaches to architectural design to a more advanced level through six hours per week of study. You are expected to produce a well-crafted comprehensive design project of some complexity based on a thorough investigation and developmental process. At a more advanced level you’ll be expected to show a comprehensive understanding of the project's technical performance. This module aims to achieve the following General Attributes of the ARB/RIBA Criteria.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Practice and Management 
   
   
    Introducing you to the context of professional practice, you’ll be given preparation for your year in placement, how to go about getting the right job and the skills involved in achieving. The RIBA jobs stages are defined with a focus on key tasks undertaken by the architect in practice. The important regulatory requirements and processes and the principles and priorities of running a traditional contract on site together with standard documents used in this process are introduced.  You’ll have a two hour lecture per week for this module  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
   Typical year-five, year-six and year-seven modules  Please contact the 
 Department for more information.