Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Developing Evidence-based Practice (research) 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the principles underpinning evidence-based practice in order to develop your ability to use evidence to inform clinical decision making. You’ll be taken through the process of evidence based practice in logical sequence and over the course of the module will develop a search strategy around a clinical question, carry out a search of the literature, critique the literature and consider the application to clinical practice. Teaching includes lectures, tutorials, library sessions, directed activities and a mini conference.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Pathophysiology 
   
   
    The module aims to prepare you with the underpinning knowledge of basic tissue structures, and in particular of nerve and muscle tissue, in order to be able to discuss the physiology of muscle contraction, the control of movement and the mechanisms of sensation (including pain). You’ll have a two hour lecture, one hour tutorial and a three 2-hour laboratory session per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Musculoskeletal Disorders and Disease 
   
   
    You’ll develop your understanding of the mechanism of injury, pathology, healing and management of fractures, soft tissue injuries and rheumatological conditions in order to provide effective physiotherapeutic management. For this module you’ll direct teacher contact, directed study, andindependent learning.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Neuromusculoskeletal Studies 
   
   
    You’ll develop a solid foundation of knowledge that relates to human structure, function and movement as well as basic physiotherapy assessment and treatment skills, and awareness of core physiotherapeutic concepts. The focus is on the cervical spine and upper limb, therefore the aim is for this knowledge to be specifically developed in respect of the cervical spine, shoulder, elbow, wrist and hand. You’ll have three 1-hour led lectures and six 1-hour practical sessions per week.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Personal and Professional Development 1 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the development of key skills used for effective study and management of your own learning. This aims to develop self-management and facilitate your ability to integrate knowledge gained in different subject areas to assist future learning. Learning style, reflection and development of strategies to facilitate independent learning are introduced and the physiological effects of illness or injury on an individual and the family will be discussed, including quality of life. Over the course of the module, you’ll have 55 hours of directed teacher contact and independent directed learning.  
   
  
      
   
      
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Respiratory Disorders and Diseases 
   
   
    This module aims to prepare you to manage patients with acute or chronic respiratory and cardiovascular disease.  You will increase your knowledge of predisposing factors and the pathological processes of disease as well as learning about treatment programs and medication. By the end of the module you’ll be able to identify a patients’ problem and select appropriate treatment methods. You will have three hours and fifteen minutes of lectures plus a clinical practical session weekly.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Therapeutic Studies 1 
   
   
    In this module you’ll develop your critical reasoning, assessment and treatment skills and concepts within assessment and treatment of musculoskeletal conditions relevant to physiotherapy. There’ll be a focus on the use of therapeutic techniques such electrotherapy (TENS, ultrasound) and hydrotherapy in the management of soft tissue injuries & associated pain. You’ll also gain an understanding of professional conduct and the clinical responsibilities of the physiotherapist. You’ll learn through a mix of lecture, seminars and practical classes, including eight hours per week of timetabled classes.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Clinical Education -- Orthopaedics 
   
   
    This practical module helps you gain practical experience while applying the theoretical knowledge you have built up in your studies so far. You’ll be dealing with the management of musculoskeletal trauma and/or elective orthopaedic surgery. You will predominantly be based in an acute ward environment but day care surgery, physiotherapy in the A & E department, out-patient follow up and hydrotherapy may be experienced during this module. You will have supervised by a designated clinical educator and have support through visits from your academic tutor. You will spend four weeks in full-time clinical practice in this module, totalling 130 hours’ work (minimum).  
   
  
      
   
  
    Therapeutic Studies 2 
   
   
    In this module you’ll extend the concepts and skills developed in therapeutic studies 1, you will improve your knowledge of the techniques introduced and learn about less frequently used methods. You will use a clinical reasoning approach to assess patients which will give you practice of providing a program of evidence-based management with different resources and in a variety of situations. You will have a mix of lectures, seminars and practical clinic-based classes totalling around eight hours weekly.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Neurology and Healthcare of the Elderly 
   
   
    This module aims to provide you with insight into the natural ageing process and the manner in which society regards the elderly both when in good health and when they are not. You’ll be introduced to the pathology, progression and effects of neurological diseases and the possible strategies of care available to the elderly. There will be an emphasis on the identification of patient problems and discussion on how these might be addressed using case studies, clinical reasoning and practical skills. You’ll have about six hours of classes for this module split between lectures, seminars and practical clinic-based sessions.  
   
  
      
   
      
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Personal and Professional Development 3 
   
   
    This module will continue the management theme established in Years one & two by building on your ability to manage your own learning and reflect on and evaluate your academic and clinical performance. To achieve this you’ll review historical and contemporary professional issues and assess how they might impact on the roles and responsibilities of a physiotherapist. You’ll have around 24 hours of contact time through lectures, tutorials and group work.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Clinical Education – Cardiorespiratory 
   
   
    This module will help deepen and extend your professional and therapeutic skills by giving you practical experience in the physiotherapeutic management of patients with acute and/or chronic cardiorespiratory dysfunction. You’ll continue to be supported by a designated clinical educator in clinic along with regular visits from your academic tutor. You’ll spend four hours in full-time clinical placement during this module. Elective Clinical Placement (0 credits)  
    This elective module is a compulsory component of the clinical education programme occurring at the final stage of the undergraduate course just prior to graduation. It is intended to act as a period for development and consolidation of knowledge and professional skills to assist in the transition from student to newly qualified physiotherapist. There’ll be an emphasis is on developing the clinical autonomy of a professional practitioner which is expected of a qualified physiotherapist. You’ll select a clinical area of personal interest that is approved by the academic team and a placement will be arranged.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Physiotherapy Project 
   
   
    Over the course of your final year, you’ll have the opportunity to produce a self-directed piece of work, supported by an academic supervisor throughout. You’ll chose an area of research worthy of investigation in the field of physiotherapy and perform a thorough examination through a long essay and a presentation of your project. This module is 100% self-directed although you will have scheduled progress meetings with your supervisor to keep you on track.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Clinical Education: Option Placement 
   
   
    This clinical placement module will take place in one of several specialist areas of physiotherapy, chosen prior to commencement of the academic year. You’ll gain practical experience in the management of a variety of musculosketal, neurological or cardiorespiratory conditions whilst being supervised by a designated clinical educator and with supporting visits from an academic tutor. The focus of the placement will depend on the option speciality chosen by you. You’ll spend four weeks full-time in clinic (minimum 130 hours).  
   
  
      
   
   Optional  
   
   Exercise Science and Therapy 
   
   
    The aim of the module is to introduce you to the theoretical and practical elements of exercise physiology and biochemistry. You’ll gain an understanding of the response of the human body to exercise and its specific adaptations to various forms of training. A range of nutritional, psychological and exercise-based strategies which can be used to improve human physical performance and health will be examined. You’ll spend one full day in classes per week for six weeks of this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Physical Activity for Health 
   
   
    This module will increase your effectiveness as health promoters and care providers by increasing your awareness of the psychological and sociological perspectives of exercise and activity participation. You’ll examine the definitions and descriptions of models of physical activity for health; you’ll then explore the benefits and barriers of these for different target populations. You’ll have one full day per week of contact time for this module, totalling 30 hours of direct lecture contact.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Burns and Plastic Medicine 
   
   
    This module will introduce the specialist area of burns and plastic surgery from a physiotherapy perspective, with an emphasis of hand trauma. It includes the medical, surgical and therapeutic management of the patient, both in the acute stage and in their long term rehabilitation with a focus on the prevention/reduction of deformities and contractures. You’ll have a mix of lectures, tutorials and clinic-based practice one day per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cardio-respiratory Option Module 
   
   
    This module will build on your knowledge and understanding of problems, presentation and therapeutic management of patients with cardio-respiratory disease from pervious modules.  You’ll consider the role of the physiotherapist as part of a multi-professional team in a variety of speciality areas such as burns, palliative care, cystic fibrosis and others. You’ll spend one full day per week on this module, incorporating six hours of clinic-based visits and two hours of tutorials every week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Sports Medicine and Sports Injuries 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the discipline of Sports Medicine. You’ll gain an understanding of the role of the physiotherapist within the context of sport, as well as the roles and perspectives of various other members of the multidisciplinary team. The subjects of injuries and medical conditions in sport will be addressed in detail. You’ll spend one full day per week for six weeks in classes for this module as well as an evening visit to a professional sports facility to observe sports physiotherapy in practice.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Analysis of Human Movement 
   
   
    This module aims to provide you with an understanding of human movement analysis. It’ll also provide you with practical experience in measuring and analysing human movement using data collection equipment, building on existing skills to evaluate critically the output of these tools and methods. You’ll consider the relevance of movement analysis to current physiotherapy practice and explore its use in a clinical or research setting. You’ll have one day per week of direct contact time for six weeks with this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    A Combined Approach to Rehabilitation of the Spine 1 
   
   
    In this module you’ll focus on the lumbar spine and pelvis, using your existing knowledge of treatments you’ll develop skills in the application and reasoning of anatomical, biomechanical and practical clinical approaches to the assessment and treatment of the spine. The module explores the rationale, philosophy and practical techniques behind different treatment approaches underpinned by the evidence currently available in the field. You’ll spend one full day per week in a mix of lectures, clinic-based practicals and independent study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Women's Health 
   
   
    In this module you’ll develop an understanding of the changes that occur at various stages throughout a woman’s life and how these may affect physical and psychological health. You’ll explore issues such as sexual health, promotion of a healthy lifestyle and inequalities in healthcare. You’ll explore and develop your understanding of current physiotherapeutic management of musculoskeletal problems associated with childbirth. You’ll have one full day per week for six weeks for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Neurorehabilitation 
   
   
    This module will provide you with a greater insight into the problems and presentations of patients with disorders of the nervous system with a particular focus on posture and balance. You’ll build upon the knowledge gained from the level two modules and the clinical modules in semesters five and six to deepen your understanding of related issues. The physiological bases behind major concepts of treatment will be explored in the context of academic physiology which will give you a greater awareness of physiotherapeutic practice. You’ll spend one full day per week working on this module.