Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Core  
  
    The Biosciences and Global Food Security 
   
   
    
    How can you use science to help improve global food security? This module introduces you to the issues of global food security and the complexity existing in different parts of our food generation system. Looking across the food supply chain, you’ll cover the evolution of crops, crop and animal production, and the food industry. Importantly, you’ll also look at sustainable nutrition because food security isn’t just about supply – it’s important that people are getting the right kind of food. You’ll learn about these issues through a mix of lectures and practical laboratory sessions. You’ll also develop professional skills to work safely in laboratory situations.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemistry – The Building Blocks of Life 
   
   
   
     Have you ever wondered how some crops can resist diseases? This module provides you with the fundamentals for understanding biochemical processes in living organisms. You’ll be introduced to the basic structure, properties and functions of the four key biological macromolecules: nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates and lipids. You’ll also look at the metabolic pathways occurring in cells, such as respiration, photosynthesis and the biosynthetic pathways for the key macromolecules. In addition to lectures, you’ll have practical laboratory sessions to learn how to use key biochemical techniques for the separation and analysis of macromolecules and measurement of the metabolic process. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Genes and Cells 1 
   
   
   
     The basic functional units of life are cells. In this module you’ll learn about the growth and development of cells, focusing on mitosis, meiosis, cell division and differentiation. You’ll get to explore the ultrastructure – the structure of a cell too small to be seen with an ordinary microscope – of animal, plant and bacterial cells and even viruses. Once you have this foundation understanding, the second part of the module covers fundamental genetic principles and you’ll be able to answer the questions: What are the Mendelian laws of inheritance? How are genes expressed? You’ll have lectures from current researchers in the field and the opportunity to apply your learning in the laboratory and in workshops.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Academic Development and Employability 
   
   
   
     In this module you will develop the academic and professional skills you need for your further studies and future career. Through small group work within tutor groups, you’ll become well-equipped in areas such as essay-writing, presentational skills (oral and written), critical interpretation of published materials, and other universal skills that will benefit you throughout your degree and into the future. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    The Ecology of Natural and Managed Ecosystems  
   
   
   
     Pollinator species are hugely important for natural systems and for managed systems like agriculture, but there is concern that numbers are declining. What physical, chemical or biotic factors are limiting these species’ distribution? What other species are they in competition with? How diverse or stable is the ecological community overall? This module introduces you to the principles of ecology and looks at how organisms have evolved to interact with their environment. You’ll also cover population (such as competition and predation) and community ecology (such as the diversity and stability of communities, patterns of species richness). You’ll explore the various definitions of biodiversity and look at the loss of species and habitats, particularly in semi-natural and managed habitats such as woodland, hedgerows, meadows, and agricultural land. You’ll have lectures from current researchers in the field and the opportunity to apply your learning in the laboratory and through field visits. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plant Science 
   
  
    Through a weekly three hour lecture, you’ll be introduced to the conventional uses of plants and describe some of the problems associated with plant production including biotic and abiotic stresses. You’ll then discuss the techniques used to study plant science, including genetics and the use of mutants before being familiarised to the applications of biotechnology in plant science.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Genes and Cells 2 
   
   
    In a series of lectures, workshops and practicals you’ll further develop your understanding of gene structure, function and regulation and investigate how this knowledge can be applied in recombinant DNA technology through DNA sequencing and genetic engineering.    
   
  
      
   
  
    Grassland Management 
   
  
    There’s more to grass than meets the eye. Grasslands are used for forage in agricultural systems but are also important as habitat for wild animals, birds and beneficial insects. In this module you’ll learn about the latest developments in grassland management, both UK and globally, and the policy issues associated with these developments. You’ll examine the morphology and physiology of forage grass species to understand the mechanisms of grass growth, production and utilisation and how these are influenced by management practices. In addition to lectures, you’ll have farm visits and computer-based tutorials so you can develop your understanding of grassland management, identify grass plants and use the latest subject-specific software to calculate a pasture budget.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plant Science Research Tutorials 
   
  
    Each week a different member of academic staff from Plant and Crop Sciences will explain and demonstrate the research being carried out by their particular group. You’ll gain an understanding of how each group’s research is contributing to the understanding of plant function and society’s needs and become familiar with how a research group is structured . This will help you when choosing your future modules. You will write a short report about a specific area of plant science research.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Foundation Science 
   
   
   
     A solid understanding of mathematics, physics and chemistry is essential for a scientist. This module will provide you with the foundation knowledge of mathematics and statistics, physics and chemistry needed for your future studies. It compensates for potential gaps in understanding resulting from different prior education. The mathematics and statistics element includes powers and logs, differentiation, significance and regression. The physics element includes energy and heat, light and the electromagnetic spectrum, attenuation/absorption, and radioactivity. The chemistry element includes elements and periodic table; atomic structure and bonding; intermolecular attractions, chemical equilibrium; acids and bases, oxidation and reduction; rates of reaction; and basic organic chemistry, isomerism, and rings. You’ll have lectures from experts in these fields and use computer-aided learning practicals to apply what you’ve learnt.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   Optional - there are no optional modules in year one  
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   Core  
  
    Plant Physiology and Applied Crop Science 
   
   
   
     Crops use solar energy, water and nutrients to grow, but how do scientists and managers overcome the limits to this growth? In this module you’ll gain a comprehensive understanding of plant physiology with an applied context – right the way from the molecular level to the field. You’ll cover major crop species in the UK and worldwide and examine the physiological basis of resource capture and utilisation in crop growth and development. You’ll explore limitations to resource capture by crops and how growers overcome these, in relation to integrated crop management. You’ll also learn about the physical aspects of the plant environment incorporating the key processes of photosynthesis, respiration, uptake and transpiration of water, and the uptake of mineral nutrients. You’ll have a mix of lectures and practical laboratory sessions to apply your learning. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Professional Skills for Bioscientists  
   
   
    
    
      In this module you will develop and consolidate your professional competencies and abilities as a bioscientist. You’ll improve your core professional skills in the scientific method, experimentation, data analysis and measurement techniques that enable you carry out scientifically-sound research in animal, crop or management science. You’ll also cover discipline-specific topics. There will be a mix of lectures, workshops and group activity sessions for you to work on your skills. 
     
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   Pathway 1  
  
    Soil Science  
   
   
    Through this introductory module, you’ll learn about the biological, physical and chemicals properties of soils and how to use this information for agricultural and environmental land management. You’ll examine how soil can affect plant growth – including through soil biota, nutrients, trace elements and compaction. You’ll look at how water moves through the soil, how soil can be eroded and ways of using soil bioremediation and reclamation.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Crop Management Challenge  
   
  
    One of the most popular modules, you’ll use all the scientific and management knowledge you’ve gained to date to put your crop management decision-making skills into practice. In small teams, you’ll make all the decisions relating to the production of a commercial crop of bread making wheat. Does your wheat plot need extra nutrients? When and how should they be applied? How much will it cost? When should your crop be harvested? How will you sell your wheat? Can you get the best price? You’ll be acting in the roles of both professional agronomist and farm manager. You’ll be supported by teaching staff but the decisions are your own. There will be lectures as well as field site visits to your plots.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Plant Pests and Disease  
   
  
    Sugarbeet root aphids feed on the sap in the roots, causing damage and production losses. But how does this pest work and what can be done? In this module, you’ll explore how microbes and insects cause disease in plants and the effect of interactions between plants, microbes and insects. Looking globally, you’ll be able to explain the importance and the nature of the organisms that are pests and diseases of plants, including population dynamics and epidemiology. You’ll also assess the main approaches for control and management of pests and diseases, including chemical interventions, resistance breeding in plants and biological control. You’ll have lectures complemented by practical laboratory sessions, videos and demonstrations.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Pathway 2  
  
    Molecular Biology and the Dynamic Cell  
   
  
    This module offers a detailed study of the core molecular processes that enable cells to function such as DNA biochemistry, gene expression, protein synthesis and degradation. You will learn about the basic molecular processes that underpin the function of eukaryotic cells and to describe how different organelles within the cell function, with an emphasis on the dynamic nature of cell biology. You will have lectures, practical classes a poster presentation and tutorials.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Techniques in Biosciences  
   
  
    This is a practical-based module that aims to provide the underlying principles of key techniques in molecular biology and enables students to get hands-on experience in a wide range of molecular techniques, developing skills that will be useful in their subsequent research projects. Some more advanced techniques will be demonstrated and the underlying principles discussed. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Pharming and Biotechnology  
   
  
    The creation of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) is having a major impact on modern agriculture. Transgenic research and “synthetic biology” approaches have the potential to enable plants to be used as “green factories” for the production of novel products. Through this module, you’ll gain both theoretical and practical knowledge as to how transgenic organisms are engineered. You’ll also learn about the production of traditional plant products and their uses in biotechnological industries, and the use of marker assisted breeding techniques. You’ll have lectures and practical laboratory sessions to really get into the analysis of the applications of these technologies, but you’ll also get to look out into industry and broader. There will be industrial field trips to see what you’ve learnt in practice and experts in the field will be invited to lecture and give some thought-provoking debate about the ethical, commercial and environmental concerns around GMO technology.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Economic Analysis for Agricultural and Environmental Sciences 
   
   
   
     Economic analysis can help you answer important management questions: how much fertiliser should I apply to my wheat? If demand for beer is going up, how will that affect the price I receive for my barley? Through this module you’ll gain an understanding of economic ideas and principles and be able to apply them to a range of problems of interest to agricultural and environmental scientists and managers. You’ll also examine the arguments for government intervention to correct ‘market failures’ with reference to the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and look at CAP support mechanisms and their impact on arable and animal production. In addition to lectures and farm visits, you’ll have computer-aided learning sessions to teach you planning techniques that will enable you to use your economic skills to analyse the impact of the market and policy environment on business performance and stability. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Soil Science 
   
   
   
     Through this introductory module, you’ll learn about the biological, physical and chemicals properties of soils and how to use this information for agricultural and environmental land management. You’ll examine how soil can affect plant growth – including through soil biota, nutrients, trace elements and compaction. You’ll look at how water moves through the soil, how soil can be eroded and ways of using soil bioremediation and reclamation. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Ecosystem Processes  
   
   
   
     The course will focus on the processes that govern terrestrial ecosystem function. We will identify key ecosystem drivers and processes and explore how these have shaped the biosphere. Students will gain an understanding of the mechanisms that control changes in the physiochemical environment and their impact upon communities. Particular topics will include primary productivity, decomposition, herbivory, biodiversity and human impact on ecosystems. Classes comprise a mix of lectures, laboratory practicals, a computer practical, a seminar and fieldwork. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Biological Photography and Imaging 1  
   
   
   
     Through practical sessions, you will learn the techniques of biological image production and manipulation, including the ability to generate biological images of the highest technical quality and scientific value. You'll spend around 6 hours per week in lectures studying this module. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Computer Modelling in Science: Introduction 
   
   
   
     Modern biological and environmental science is often the study of complex systems and large data sets, and relies on computer models and analyses to understand these systems and data. This module introduces you to the computer programming and modelling techniques that are used in the biological and environmental sciences. Using relevant examples and applications, you’ll become familiar with computer programming and algorithms using the Python programming language, and explore how to analyse image data. You’ll also learn how to construct mathematical models for biological and environmental systems using difference and differential equations, with a particular emphasis on population dynamics, and how to simulate, analyse these models and fit these models to data. In computer laboratory sessions, you’ll apply your learning to specific problems, such as environmental pollution, growth of microbial populations, disease epidemics, or computer manipulation of images of plants, animals or the natural environment.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plant Pests and Diseases  
   
   
   
     Sugarbeet root aphids feed on the sap in the roots, causing damage and production losses. But how does this pest work and what can be done? In this module, you’ll explore how microbes and insects cause disease in plants and the effect of interactions between plants, microbes and insects. Looking globally, you’ll be able to explain the importance and the nature of the organisms that are pests and diseases of plants, including population dynamics and epidemiology. You’ll also assess the main approaches for control and management of pests and diseases, including chemical interventions, resistance breeding in plants and biological control. You’ll have lectures complemented by practical laboratory sessions, videos and demonstrations. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Core  
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    Your research project will run throughout the final year. It may be laboratory or field-based and provides you with an opportunity to  undertake an original research project under the supervision of an individual member of academic staff.  
    This project encourages critical thinking and involves independent research in a supportive environment, a literature survey, and data handling, analysis and interpretation. Examples of recent projects inlcude:   
    
     General awareness and attitudes towards GM foods  
     Nuclear and Plastid DNA evolution  
     Use of PCR to monitor transposons in petunia  
     Enzymes involved in taxol biosynthesis in transgenic plants  
     Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of chickory  
     Use of a fern for the phytoremediation of soil contaminated with arsenic  
     Use of UV-C radiation to inhibit post-harvest fungal pathogens of fruit  
     DNA-based detection of plant pathogens  
    
    Read BURN the Biosciences Undergraduate Research at Nottingham web pages to find out more about undergraduate research projects. BURN is a freely accessible e-journal which showcases final-year research projects undertaken by biosciences students.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    Field Crops Cereals 
   
   
   
     A highly applied module, you’ll learn how to optimise the management of different cereal crops to meet the requirements of specific environments and end-uses. To do this, you’ll learn about the production strategies for the major grain cereals, with particular emphasis on factors controlling yield and quality. You’ll also examine the structure and function of the Gramineae and the influence of the environment and management practices on crop growth and development. You’ll have a mix of lectures, seminars, in-class exercises and field work to develop and apply your understanding. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plants and the Light Environment 
   
   
   
     In this module, you’ll study the influence of the light environment on the physiology of native and crop species, extending from the cellular to community level. You’ll learn how to differentiate between different light signalling pathways in plants and demonstrate how these pathways function in plants. You’ll be able to explain how light is absorbed by plants to initiate energy transfer systems and to stimulate developmental pathways of photomorphogenesis. You’ll then be able to apply your knowledge in understanding the causes of variations in crop yields and how these may be used to assist in the search for improved varieties and increased productivity in agricultural systems. You’ll have a mix of lectures, demonstrations and field trips to see what you’ve learnt in practice. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plant Cell Signalling 
   
   
   
     How does a plant know when it is being attacked? In this module you’ll learn about plant signalling molecules and the ways in which these signals are integrated to ensure appropriate responses to environmental conditions or plant pathogen attack. You’ll gain a detailed knowledge of how plants use intercellular and intracellular signalling strategies to provide information about their environment, with particular emphasis on the use of molecular genetics in enabling us to determine the nature of the signals and the cross-talk that takes place between them. You’ll have lectures and demonstrations, as well as laboratory sessions to gain practical experience of the techniques for studying plant hormone signalling. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Plant Pathology 
   
   
   
     Crops can defend themselves from disease, but how do they do it? In this module, you’ll learn about the molecular biology of plant pathogens, how these cause disease, and the mechanisms used by plants to defend themselves against such pathogens. You’ll examine the specific molecular techniques being used to develop an understanding of these plant/pathogen interactions. Bringing in current research, you’ll be able to evaluate and critically assess recent research in plant pathogen interactions. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Fundamental and Applied Aspects of Plant Genetic Manipulation 
   
   
   
     Through a weekly four hour lecture, this module focuses on the theory and application of the approaches to genetic engineering in agriculture, horticulture and forestry. Tissue culture techniques, including protoplast manipulations and gene delivery systems, will be evaluated as an adjunct to conventional plant breeding and the continuing need for new plant varieties targeted to commercial markets.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Biomolecular Data and Networks 
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to familiarize you with the experimental sources of biomolecular data, databases for such data and their interactions and the mathematical and computational ideas behind their visualization and network generation. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and practicals studying for this module.
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Genomics Technologies 
   
   
   
     You’ll be introduced to the fields of genomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics, proteomics and bioinformatics. Particular focus will be the use and application of bioinformatics for understanding of the functional roles of genes, metabolites and proteins and how they can be analysed using a variety of new technologies. You’ll spend three hours in lectures each week as part of this module.
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Current Issues in Crop Science 
   
  
    In this integrative module you’ll consider the future options and possible strategies for maintaining or increasing crop production in the UK and world agriculture. You’ll learn about the latest trends and developments within crop science, and the philosophical, ethical and policy issues associated with them. The topics covered will vary to reflect the most recent issues, but have included: the future of genetically modified crops, impact of crop production on biodiversity and prospects for organic crop production. Using your subject knowledge and research skills, you’ll be in a position to critically analyse the advantages and disadvantages of developments in crop science, both for the module and in your future career. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Soil and Water Pollution and Reclamation 
   
   
   
     In this module, you’ll study improvement and continued management of intractable or contaminated terrestrial and aquatic environments. The focus is on both the scientific understanding of environmental problems and on the intervention strategies currently available. You’ll spend nine hours per week in lectures studying for this module. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plants and the Soil Environment 
   
   
   
     What happens below the ground that affects the water and nutrient uptake by plants? In this module, you’ll examine the acquisition of water and nutrients by plants in both agricultural and natural systems, and how plants interact with the soil environment. You’ll learn about the evolution of root adaptations which enable plants to thrive in environments with limited or excess water and nutrients. In an agricultural setting, you’ll explore how water and nutrient uptake by plants can be used to improve crop productivity and resource management, and use the practical study component to investigate new methods and technologies for below-ground phenotyping of roots. You’ll have a mix of lectures and computer-based practicals to gain a fundamental understanding of how water and nutrients are acquired by plants from the soil environment, and their influence on plant growth and development. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plant Disease Control 
   
   
   
     As an agricultural or crop scientist, you need to know not only how to deal with a disease in a crop but also potential methods to prevent it in the first place. In this module, you’ll gain an understanding of the applied aspects of plant disease control, in particular transmission, epidemiology, detection and diagnosis and control strategies. You’ll analyse the problems of plant diseases and be able to describe the options available to control losses due to disease and the strengths and weaknesses of these options. You’ll examine control strategies based on a range of approaches – including application of fungicides, biological control, deployment of disease resistant varieties and biotechnological approaches. Importantly, you’ll learn about the strategies used by plant pathogens to spread between plants and cause disease epidemics. You’ll have lectures and a field visit, as well as practical laboratory sessions to develop laboratory skills associated with disease diagnosis.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Sex, Flowers and Biotechnology 
   
   
   
     The processes of floral development and reproduction are some of the most critical stages occurring during plant growth and development. They are fundamental for plant breeding, crop productivity and horticulture. The significance of plant reproduction is particularly pertinent to issues of food security and the future development of high yielding crops. In this module, you’ll focus on recent developments that have been made in the understanding of floral development, reproduction and seed production, including the current goals, methods and achievements in the genetic engineering of crop and horticultural plants. With an emphasis on reproductive biology or fruit production, you’ll learn how such processes can be manipulated for commercial exploitation and to facilitate crop improvement. Through a mix of lectures and seminars, you’ll gain a detailed knowledge on the developmental and molecular processes associated with flowering, seed production and fruit development. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Genetic Improvement of Crop Plants 
   
   
   
     The genetic improvement of crop plants is critical to address issues of food security for a growing world population and in the face of a changing climate. It is also the key to tackling environmental degradation and to meeting the increasing strict regulations on agricultural pollution which are coming into force in many Western countries. While these issues are not identical, they are linked and efficient plant breeding can be part of the solution to both. In this module, you’ll develop an understanding of crop genetic improvement through lectures, case and literature studies, research plan presentations, external expert seminars and practical exposure to crop breeding and molecular techniques. You’ll examine how modern and technological approaches can enhance crop breeding programmes and be able to assess the limitations of these approaches. The emphasis is on the application of biotechnology to conventional breeding, but you’ll also learn about genetic modification in the genetic improvement of crops. You’ll cover temperate and tropical, annual and perennial, and in-breeding and out-breeding crops.