Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff. They're also shaped by new developments in industry and as a consequence, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Integrated Design in Architecture 
   
   
   This module introduces you to the principle of a holistic and integrated approach to building design. Firstly, you’ll learn about the notion of thinking architecture, the fundamental principles of design and drawing skills and typologies as key areas of study. Then you’ll focus on methodology and approaches relevant to the studio comprehensive design project with a more intensified examination of topics such as light, narrative and sustainability. For this module you’ll have one 1-hour lecture per week for this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Architectural Design Studio 1A 
   
  
    This module introduces you to basic design, drafting, model making and drawing skills. You’ll have six-hour weekly practicals with the semester finishes with the design of a small building that will test your understanding and application of the knowledge gained on this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Architectural Design Studio 1B 
   
   
   This studio-based module develops your basic design, drafting, model making and drawing skills. Through two weekly six-hour practicals you’ll be introduced to historical precedents and computer-aided drawing programmes. These exercises will feed into a small comprehensive design project of a public building.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Science for Architects 1 
   
   
   Introducing you to the environmental agenda as it applies to the architectural profession, you’ll explore the key bioclimatic strategies used to maintain appropriate conditions for the occupants of buildings, thus tying together occupant comfort, building schedule  and climate. You’ll have a 2-hour lecture per week using both physical modelling and computer simulation techniques to gain a better understanding of the strategies involved and their relationship with building design. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Tectonics 1 
   
  
    This module introduces you to the technology, materials and techniques used in constructing buildings and the importance of considering it as an integral part of the design process. Through two-hour weekly lectures you’ll conduct practical structural modelling exercises and develop a basic understanding of the qualitative behaviour of structures and the interaction between structural form and the loads that they have to carry.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Architectural Humanities 1: History of Architecture  
   
  
    This module offers you an introduction to the history of architecture from ancient times to the present day. A two-hour weekly lecture aims to familiarise you with major architectural typologies and the social and technological changes that brought them into being.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    People, Buildings, Landscape 
   
   
   The overall aim of this module is to give you an understanding of the impact that the built environment has on those who inhabits its space. Through a 2-hour lecture each week you’ll broaden your awareness of built environment design issues, illustrate how design decisions impact more broadly on environmental, economic, social and experiential issues and study behavioural psychology and its influence on built environment design. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
  
    Performance of Construction Materials 
   
   
   This module introduces you to some of the technical knowledge and techniques for surveying buildings and structures and identifying common defects using both qualitative and quantitative methods of assessment. Through a two-hour lecture each week you’ll cover topics such as moisture ingress, surface and interstitial condensation, freeze/thaw resistance, rot and infestation, sulphate attack, carbonation and corrosion.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Integrated Design in Architecture 2A 
   
  
    Following on from the key principles introduced in the year one module, Integrated Design in Architecture, you’ll further develop your communication and research skills which will underpin your work in both the theorisation and practice of architecture. Through one-hour weekly lectures you’ll explore the research methodologies and skills needed to identify and synthesise relevant and accurate information as well visual communication skills focusing on CAD programs, where skills will be developed through workshops and self-directed exercises.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Integrated Design in Architecture 2B 
   
  
    Continuing development of your architectural skills and knowledge, this module will include training on CAD software and workshops led by designers from other creative industries. Through a one-hour lecture each week you’ll bring together the disciplines of practice and theory and illustrate the interaction between different architectural design ideas and approaches.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Architecture Design Studio 2A 
   
  
    This studio-based module aims to develop your basic skills and approaches to architectural design through a series of design projects. You’ll spend around 12 hours per week in the studio with the emphasis on the ‘craftsmanship of architecture’, improving the spatial, aesthetic, sensual as well as practical, structural and dimensional qualities of your design.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Architecture Design Studio 2B 
   
   
   Following on from the previous module Architectural Design Studio 2A, this module involves spending 12 hours per week in the studio and develops a more comprehensive understanding of architectural design and requires you to take a certain level of responsibility for your design decisions. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Science for Architects 2 
   
   
   Building upon the themes covered in the year one module - Environmental Science for Architects 1, this module looks more specifically at the flows of energy that occur out with and within buildings and how these relate to and integrate with some of the numerous systems employed that may help with their control. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures studying for this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Tectonics 2A 
   
  
    Dealing with small to medium-scale buildings, you’ll build on knowledge acquired in Tectonics 1, focusing on structural systems, building elements, material, components, connections, construction methods and detailing. During two hours of lecture each week, emphasis is placed on how constituent parts come together to construct building entities through investigation and analysis of structural principles, detail, material composition and performance of primary building elements.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Tectonics 2B 
   
   
   The module builds upon work covered in Tectonics 2A, developing practical knowledge and understanding of the material and technical dimensions of building design, current trends in the construction industry, collaborative modes of working with specialists, and to support the application of this knowledge and understanding in the design studio.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Architectural Humanities 2 
   
  
    This course provides a historical, cultural and philosophical context to the major contemporary debates in architecture today giving understanding of architecture's potential as both a useful and meaningful cultural activity. Key issues from the history of philosophy will be examined alongside a range of building case-studies in order to develop a series of alternative interpretive frameworks through which buildings may be analysed, criticised, debated and understood. For this module you’ll a one 2-hour lecture per week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   
   
  
    Acoustics and Lighting 
   
  
    This module introduces you to the fundamentals of acoustic and lighting phenomena as they relate to design within the built environment. During two hours of lectures each week, you’ll be given an overview of the psychological and technical considerations that underpin design requirements and explore the selection of acoustic and lighting strategies relating to the design of buildings through the introduction of appropriate tools and techniques.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Architectural Language and Spatial Narratives 
   
  
    Through a series of two-hour lectures, you’ll look at the issue of architectural and spatial representations in the development of architectural theory,  delivered in line with both the realistic built environment scope- the historical, modern and post-modern languages in architectural and spatial design, and the surrealistic built environmental scope.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
   
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Practice and Management 
   
   
   Introducing you to the context of professional practice, this module prepares you for your year in placement by discussing the year out, how to go about getting the right job and the skills involved in achieving this. Through two hours of lectures each week you’ll look at the important regulatory requirements and processes and the principles and priorities of running a traditional contract on site together with standard documents used in this process.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Architectural Humanities 3: Theories in Contemporary Architecture 
   
  
    This course explores contemporary architecture in relation to major social, economic, political, ecological, and technological transformations after the Second World War. A wide range of topics including consumerism, globalization, mass media, cultural identities and changing economic structures are discussed in terms of their role in shaping architectural theory, practice, and built environment. Two hours of lectures each week employ building case studies, film excerpts, and assigned readings to analyse key concepts.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Integrated Design in Architecture 3 
   
  
    Building on previous IDA modules, you’ll develop the context for integrated building design to an advanced level and to support its application through holistic design practices. Through a series of one hour lectures, workshops and tutorials, a range of technical topics will be covered that prescribe a range of multi-disciplinary inputs that an architect is likely to confront when devising a real project. Such thematic topics include daylight-sunlight, materials, fa&ccedil;ade, structure, building fabric and acoustics.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Architectural Design Studio 3 
   
   
   This studio-based module aims to further develop your skills and approaches to architectural design to a more advanced and complete level. Through 12 hours of studio classes, you’ll produce a well-crafted comprehensive design project of some complexity based on a thorough investigation and developmental process and show a comprehensive understanding of the project's technical performance.
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional 
   
  
    Landscape Design: Meaning and Making 
   
  
    You’ll consider key issues within landscape architectural discourse and practice and be introduced to a number of theoretical approaches to landscape and their relationship to professional practice. Through two hours of lectures each week you’ll study the ways of ‘reading’ landscape including modes of interpreting or experiencing landscape, designing landscapes to express according to particular values, and critically assessing designed landscape outcomes and performance.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Urban Design Theory 
   
  
    Introducing you to the history and theory of urban design, during a two hour lecture each week you’ll be given an understanding of the design of the city and its elements, and develop skills in the diagnosis and analysis of urban patterns.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
   For a complete list of all the modules offered by the Department of Architecture and Built Environment please see the University module catalogue.