Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  Typical year one modules  
  Core modules  
 
   British Political History Since 1945 
  
  
  
    This module will introduce and interrogate British political history since 1945. The module will take students through key issues and controversies in post-war British politics and as they relate to leaders and governments (in lectures) and key debates over controversies (in seminars).  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module will explore a range of issues relating to: 
   
   
    
    
     economic policy  
     social policy and the welfare state  
     industrial relations  
     foreign and defence policy  
     Europe  
     local government and nuclear deterrence  
    
   
  
    Seminars will employ a range of activity-based scenarios to develop student understanding of key crises experienced by leaders and governments since 1945.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     give students a broad general knowledge and understanding of specific crises and controversies in post-war and contemporary British politics  
     provide knowledge of the specific historical context(s) within which political actors and institutions in British politics have operated over the period since 1945    
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Foundations for Politics and International Relations 
  
  
  
    This module introduces students to the intellectual and practical skills they will need for the successful study of politics. These include: 
   
   
    
     critical awareness of sources  
     developing effective arguments  
     note-taking and efficient reading  
     using the library and searching for resources  
     effective interpretation and presentation of data  
     essay writing  
     presentation skills     
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
     develop the practical and intellectual skills that students need to successfully study politics.     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Comparative Politics 
  
  
  
    This module seeks to compare and contrast the decision-making structures of modern democratic states.  
   
   
    
   
  
    Topics to be covered will include:  
   
   
    
    
     politics  
     government and the state  
     the comparative approach  
     constitutions and the legal framework  
     democratic and authoritarian rule  
     political culture  
     the political executive  
     legislatures  
     political parties and party systems  
     electoral systems and voting behaviour  
     the crisis of democracy  
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     study the structure and politics of modern democratic states   
    
   
  
    The lectures and readings will include a number of contemporary examples, and the module will help the students to understand similarities and differences between politics as practiced in a wide range of countries. 
   
   
    
   
  
    Moreover, the module will introduce students to the methods of comparative politics, and explore hypothesis construction and theory testing.    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Modern Political Theory 
  
  
  
    This module introduces students to the ideas of some of the canonical thinkers in the history of political thought, such as Burke, Rousseau, Kant, Mill, and Marx.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module considers the impact of these thinkers on modern political thought and practice, with reference to key political ideas and historical developments (such as liberty and equality, and the Enlightenment). The course will be text based.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to provide knowledge of: 
   
   
    
    
     the history of western political thought  
     some central issues and debates of political philosophy  
     the contexts in which the various thinkers wrote  
     the principal arguments of their canonical texts   
     their analysis of key ideas such as property, liberty, the role of the state etc      
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Political Theory from Ancient to Modern 
  
  
  
    This module introduces students to the ideas of some of the canonical thinkers in the history of political thought, such as Aristotle, Plato, Machiavelli, and Hobbes.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module considers the impact of these thinkers on modern political thought and practice, with reference to key political ideas and historical developments (such as liberty and equality, and the Enlightenment). The course will be text based.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to provide knowledge of: 
   
   
    
     the history of western political thought  
     some central issues and debates of political philosophy  
     the contexts in which the various thinkers wrote   
     the principal arguments of their canonical texts  
     their analysis of key ideas such as property, liberty, the role of the state etc   
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Problems in Global Politics 
  
  
  
    This module explores some of the major problems that exist in contemporary global politics.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It introduces students to a wide range of challenges faced by states and non-state actors in the international system and engages with topics ranging from security concerns to economic issues.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module draws on a wide range of ideas and examples from around the world to help students to better understand global politics.    
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     introduce students to specific problems and questions that have arisen in the “global” arena  
     provide a firm foundation for further study on theoretical, comparative, or institutional studies  
     encourage students to engage critically with key questions such as what constitutes a “state”    
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Understanding Global Politics 
  
  
  
    This module introduces global politics through the major theoretical, historical and empirical ways of seeing international relations.  
   
   
    
   
  
    We consider how different approaches understand global politics, the role of different actors in global politics and different approaches to organising international relations. In particular the module highlights the major issues of war and peace, and global poverty.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     introduce students to the major theoretical, historical, and empirical ways of seeing international relations  
     provide detailed instruction on the study of global politics through encouraging students to engage with key concepts and theoretical interpretations  
     deepen students’ appreciation of these issues through studying six key thinkers in the field    
    
   
  
 
     
  
  Typical year two modules  
  Core modules  
 
   Approaches to Politics and International Relations 
  
  
  
    The module introduces students to alternative theoretical approaches to the study of political phenomena.  
   
   
    
   
  
    We consider the different forms of analysing, explaining, and understanding politics associated with approaches such as: 
   
   
    
    
     behaviouralism  
     rational choice theory  
     institutionalism  
     Marxism  
     feminism  
     interpretive theory   
     post-modernism  
    
   
  
    The module shows that the different approaches are based upon contrasting ‘ontological’ suppositions about the nature of politics, and they invoke alternative ‘epistemological’ assumptions about how we acquire valid knowledge of politics and international relations.  
   
   
    
   
  
    We examine questions such as:  
   
   
    
    
     what constitutes valid knowledge in political science and international relations?   
     should political science methodology be the same as the methods employed in the natural sciences?   
     can we give causal explanations of social and political phenomena?   
     can we ever be objective in our analysis?   
     what is the relationship between knowledge and power?   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Designing Political Research 
  
  
  
    This module will help students to understand some of the key methods used by professional researchers who work in the areas of politics and international relations.  
   
   
    
   
  
    We give you hands-on experience in research skills relevant to undertaking projects in politics and international relations, many of which will be useful to you in your future careers.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     develop an understanding of select methodological issues involved in the design and conduct of political science research  
     critically assess different types of research methods that are used in political science  
     critically evaluate the political science literature from a methodological point of view  
     provide a solid starting point for the design and conduct for individual research projects in the future    
    
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Students are also required to take at least one module from each of the below streams:  
  Typical theory modules    
 
   Democracy and its Critics 
  
  
  
    Democracy is a contested concept and organising principle of politics both ancient and modern. Its appeal seems to be universal, yet it has always had its critics.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This module investigates the nature of democratic principles, the arguments of democracy’s opponents and the claims of those who say that contemporary life is inadequately democratised. A particular feature of the module is the use of primary sources to investigate historic and contemporary debates.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     provide an ability to assess the core constitutive ideas of democracy in its many manifestations   
     give an understanding of the case made against democracy by its various opponents   
     give an understanding of the appeal of democracy, but also why its establishment can be problematic    
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Social and Global Justice 
  
  
  
    'Justice' has been one of the key themes of political theory at least from the time of Plato, as questions of who gets what, when, and why are absolutely central to political discourse.  
   
   
    
   
  
    Recently, questions of distributive and social justice have taken on a global dimension. Does the developed world have obligations to distant others, and do they have rights against it?  
   
   
    
   
  
    This module will look at these questions from a contemporary perspective, looking at ideas about justice from thinkers such as the utilitarians, John Rawls, Thomas Pogge, Susan Moller Okin, and Bhikhu Parekh.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     introduce students to core concepts in political philosophy/history of political thought, especially the concepts of justice and equality  
     encourage students to think analytically about the meaning of these concepts and the extent to which it depends upon historical circumstances  
     encourage students to think about the practical application of these concepts to contemporary social and political problems    
    
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical comparative modules  
 
   British Party Politics 
  
  
  
    Political parties were central to the British political system throughout the 20th century and remain so at the beginning of the 21st. Despite persistent criticism, and perennial claims of their ‘decline’, parties are an essential component of any student’s understanding of British politics and remain the central means by which the electorate passes judgement on the government.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This module examines the structure, ideology and history of British political parties. Topics covered include the ongoing development of the electoral and party systems in the UK, the history of the major parties, along with their ideologies and beliefs.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     introduce students to the structure, ideology and history of British political parties and to the nature of the electoral competition between parties  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Comparative European Politics 
  
  
  
    This module aims to provide students with a systematic introduction to current debates in the comparative analysis of European politics.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module adopts a thematic approach and focuses on traditional fields of comparative enquiry, such as: 
   
   
   
    
     the study of party systems and representation  
     elections and voting behaviour  
     party competition and government formation  
     executive-legislative relations  
    
   
  
    It also looks at emerging fields of interest, such as: 
   
   
   
    
     political participation  
     extreme right politics  
     immigration  
     political corruption  
     the political and social challenges of globalisation and European integration   
    
   
  
    The diverse experiences of liberal democracy in European countries and the political and social changes that they have undergone are discussed thematically in the seminars.  
   
   
    
   
  
    In the seminars, a country-expert system is used whereby students are assigned a particular country to cover.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module covers both long-established democracies in Western Europe and newer democracies in Central and Eastern Europe.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     give students a knowledge of contemporary developments in European politics  
     provide an understanding of the relationship between domestic and global forces  
     provide knowledge of the actors and institutions, politics and society in selected European countries  
     examine real-world problems through theoretical concepts and empirical application  
     engage in debates surrounding emerging fields of interest, such as political participation, extreme right politics, immigration, political corruption and the political and social challenges of globalisation and European integration  
     develop analytical and theoretical skills that provide the foundations for higher degrees or that can be transferred directly into professional careers  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Government and Politics of the USA 
  
  
  
    This module focuses on the institutions and processes of the government and politics of the United States.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It explores the concepts of limited government, constitutionalism and checks and balances and the way in which they operate in the American political system.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It examines how American governments seek to make policy, the extent to which they can make an impact on society and the different types of constraints on their actions.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It also looks at how citizens attempt to influence the activities of government and their expectations and beliefs about what is the appropriate role for government.  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical International Relations modules  
 
   Civilisation and Barbarism 
  
  
  
    This module explores some of the major themes in the study of International Relations.  
   
   
    
   
  
    Themes include: 
   
   
    
    
     Power and order   
     strategy  
     war  
     imperialism  
     emancipation  
     race  
     law  
     ‘civilization’  
     barbarism  
     terrorism  
     torture  
     human rights  
    
   
  
    The course is distinctive in two respects: 
   
   
    
    
     First - the study of these themes each week takes its bearings from a significant text, and that text in its entirety  
     Second - the emphasis is on the interplay between the form and style of these texts and the ideas they contain  
    
   
  
    Students read all sorts of texts – novels, reportage, essays, a manifesto, a treatise, perhaps even a film – to investigate the political and ethical dimensions of the work.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     familiarise students with modern international relations texts that have become building-blocks of the literature, the schools of thought they belong to and/or have given rise to, and key themes and debates in the field  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Global Security 
  
  
  
    This module explores issues in global security since the end of the Cold War. It focuses on security in a broad sense, from issues relating to the use of force by states, through to violence by non-state actors, such as terrorist groups, and on to the concept of human security.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module builds on the first year modules 'Understanding Global Politics' and 'Problems in Global Politics', challenging students to deepen their theoretical as well as empirical knowledge in international security.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It is also a preparation for the research-led third year modules that require a much more developed capacity of analysing empirical developments from a range of different theoretical perspectives.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     introduce students to different theoretical approaches in global security  
     facilitate an understanding of the empirical development of global security since the end of the Cold War  
     investigate the breadth of issues within the field of global security  
     prepare students theoretically for advanced Level 3 modules in IR    
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Political Economy and Global Development 
  
  
  
    This module studies the historical development of international political economy with a specific focus on development as well as the different ways this can be theoretically analysed.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module builds on the first year modules 'Understanding Global Politics' and 'Problems in Global Politics', challenging students to deepen their theoretical as well as empirical knowledge in IPE.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It is also a preparation for the research-led third year modules, which require a much more developed capacity of analysing empirical developments from a range of different theoretical perspectives.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     deepen an understanding of the inter-linkages between political economy and development  
     compare classical theories of modernisation theory, dependency, and imperialism with contemporary processes of development  
     promote a critical appreciation of social forces in the historical and contemporary making of the ‘Third World’    
    
   
  
 
     
  
  Typical year three modules  
  Typical modules  
 
   Airpower and Modern Warfare 
  
  
  
    Today, war without airpower is an unlikely prospect and major military operations, as a rule, are launched with overwhelming air attacks.  
   
   
    
   
  
    In recent years, the utility of ‘strategic’ airpower has increasingly come under question. Whilst technological innovation continues to strengthen airpower’s capabilities, the relevance of these capabilities in contemporary conflicts cannot be taken for granted.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This module critically assesses the role of air power in modern conflict within the broader framework of strategic and security studies. It will assess the evolution of air power theory since the First World War and examine the limits of its practical application with reference to specific air campaigns.  
   
   
    
   
  
    Particular emphasis will be placed on the role of air power in the post-Cold War security environment, for example, in counterterrorism and counterinsurgency campaigns.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     develop a comprehensive understanding of developments in airpower strategy and its role in warfare from the First World War until today  
     demonstrate the ability to relate the role and uses of airpower to relevant theoretical debates in contemporary strategic and security studies   
     critically engage with the literature on airpower     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Comparative Electoral Systems 
  
  
  
    This module offers a comparative analysis of electoral rules. The module will focus on the way electoral institutions work, as well as their effects on political outcomes and behaviour.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It will emphasise the rules used to elect presidents and assemblies, and it will examine electoral rules in countries throughout the world, including the U.S., South America, Eastern and Western Europe, and Asia.    
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     provide an understanding of what types of electoral systems might be more or less appropriate for different contexts  
     help students to be able to make predictions about different countries’ politics, even if armed with no other information about the countries outside of the rules used to elect politicians   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Dissertation 
  
 
   This module enables students to undertake a sustained piece of research and analysis into a subject within the discipline of politics.   
  
 
     
  
 
   Global Insurgencies: Radical Politics Today 
  
  
  
    The processes of globalisation and information technology have revolutionised our society and have changed the nature, scope and effects of resistances.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This module surveys some of the key developments in radical political thought and practice.   
   
   
    
   
  
    Students will study exemplary texts and contemporary events and political forms, such as: 
   
   
   
    
     the Zapatistas  
     Seattle 1999  
     Via Campesina  
     the Chavez  
     phenomena  
     the Brazilian landless workers' movement  
     the World Social Forum  
     the Arab Spring  
     Occupy Wall St.   
    
   
  
    The main aim is to understand how we can comprehend the local, national, and global contemporary resistance movements with recourse to re-workings of traditional Marxist, Anarchist, and Socialist theory.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     give students a deeper understanding of contemporary politics  
     compare new and traditional forms of radical thought and action  
     understand contemporary political processes and resistance from the point of view of subaltern groups and movements  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Governing Britain's Cities: Power, Politics and Difference 
  
  
  
    Cities are places of both conflict and cooperation, characterised by civic pride and neighbourliness but also by social inequality and, on occasion, violent protest.  
   
   
    
   
  
    Cities are also places of difference, experienced in diverse ways by men and women, older and younger people, and by citizens from different ethnic and religious groups. Given such complexity, how should Britain’s cities be governed?  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module examines approaches to city leadership, local representation, citizenship and community engagement, and public service delivery.  
   
   
    
   
  
    Students will analyse contemporary policy issues (localism, Big Society, austerity, multiculturalism), gain a grounding in urban theory, and also have the chance to test their knowledge ‘on the ground’ (via case studies and presentations from policymakers, practitioners and activists).   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     offer a critical overview of a range of theoretical approaches to understanding city governance and urban politics, including interdisciplinary insights  
     familiarise students with key issues in urban politics (top-down and bottom-up)  
     introduce students to the main policy options for governing cities, with particular reference to Britain  
     offer students the opportunity to critically assess research-based case studies  
     familiarise students with the challenges and opportunities faced by local policymakers and practitioners, and to enhance their employability in these areas  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Ideas and Politics in Contemporary Britain 
  
  
  
    The aim of this module is to explain and assess the nature and role of ideas and ideologies in British politics. It examines how and why the policies of the 'mainstream' British parties (Conservative, Labour and the Liberal Democrats) have been affected by ideas and ideologies, on the one hand, and by political pragmatism, on the other.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It also explores the ideas, ideologies and policies of minor parties and ‘new social movements’ (ecologism; fascism, Nazism and racism; feminism; multiculturalism, and nationalism) and their significance for the study and practice of politics in Britain today.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     provide an understanding of a range of political ideologies and the role of ideas in British politics  
     introduce the ideological (re-)positioning of British political parties and new social movements  
     give students an ability to explain and assess the role and significance of political ideas and ideologies in contemporary Britain   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Politics of Race 
  
  
  
    This module is designed to provide an introduction to the international politics of race for final-year students.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module begins discussing changing historical meaning of race and the changing historical critiques of race focusing on the shift from universalist to relativist approaches.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module goes on to discuss the historical meaning of race in international politics a) the colonial experience b) Second World War c) after the Second World War and the discrediting of racial theories.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module then considers the evolving international policy approaches toward race and culture, in particular looking at UNESCO’s approaches. Finally the module analyses the changing international debates over the politics of race in light of the election of US President Obama.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     give a sense of the evolving historical international politics of race in their international political and historical context  
     offer an understanding of the international theories of race and culture  
     offer an understanding of universalist versus relativist approaches and debates  
     provide an understanding of the evolving international policy approaches toward race and culture   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Parliamentary Studies 
  
  
  
    The module identifies and evaluates the role that Parliament plays in the political system.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module is both descriptive and analytical, comprising an introduction to Parliament (such as its place in the political process, the impact of party) and an investigation into the effectiveness or otherwise of its scrutiny and influence of selected sectors of government responsibility.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It covers the process of legislation, scrutiny, and links with the public. The module also considers the role of the House of Lords.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     develop an understanding of the UK Parliament and its role in the British political system    
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Politics and Drugs 
  
  
  
    This module studies the implications of the growing abuse of narcotics for the political system from both a national and international perspective.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It will examine the production, consumption and trade in drugs as an international problem.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The development of and issues associated with contemporary British drug policy will be explored and the theoretical questions raised by drug control policy will be examined.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     consider the extent of the contemporary drug problem and its implications for national and international politics  
     examine the nature of national and international policies to combat illicit drug use   
     explore the political issues surrounding prohibition  
     undertake a critical evaluation of UK and international drug policy  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Politics of East Asia 
  
  
  
    This module affords an understanding of the linkage between international and domestic politics in East Asia.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module is divided into three parts: 
   
   
    
    
     The first part offers conceptual and historical perspectives that enable one to analyse how international and domestic politics relate to each other.  
     The second part focuses on China and Japan, and examines their domestic transformation and foreign policy development in the post-cold war period.   
     The third part focuses on key issues of the region, and examines how those issues affect domestic transformation of East Asian states, and in turn, how the domestic transformation affects those issues.   
    
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     enable students to identify and discuss conceptual and historical perspectives found in the literature on the politics of East Asia  
     explore ways to analyse the links between global and domestic politics in East Asia and how they relate to the conceptual and historical perspectives in the literature  
     develop a framework of enquiry within which students can construct subject-related knowledge and relevant research skills   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Property and its Critics 
  
  
  
    Our world is dominated by institutions of private property. Why?  
   
   
    
   
  
    What justifies the existence of private property? Why should (these) owners own (this) property? What could justify vast disparities in the ownership of the world's finite resources? Why does (almost) nobody ask these questions?  
   
   
    
   
  
    These are the issues that are explored in this module drawing on a wide range of texts and arguments, ancient and modern.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     develop students' skills in the investigation of key texts  
     develop students' skills of diagnosis and argument in relation to a formative idea of political life  
     stimulate an appreciation of the centrality of property to key problems (and solutions) in contemporary political life   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Re-thinking the Cold War 
  
  
  
    The module will examine issues and themes in international relations theory through the prism of the Cold War.  
   
   
    
   
  
    Each lecture/class will be orientated to investigating one aspect of international relations theory in light of some aspect of the Cold War.  
   
   
    
   
  
    For instance, we will examine:  
   
   
   
    
     questions of ideology and international relations in reference to containment  
     counterfactuals and international relations in light of the Korean War  
     questions about political psychology with respect to the Cuban missile crisis  
     issues pertaining to periodicity in terms of the ‘second Cold War’  
     questions about prediction and the purposes of theory in relation to the end of the Cold War  
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     complement other elements of the degree programme   
     familiarise students with the main events of the Cold War as it played out in different regions of the globe  
     establish competence in a variety of theoretical approaches to the analysis of world affairs  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Politics of East and Central Europe 
  
  
  
    This module provides a critical assessment of the development of democracy in the post-communist states of East-Central Europe.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It analyses: 
   
   
    
    
     the historical legacy of communism including the imposition of communist rule  
     the failure of reform and the collapse of the communist system  
     the political transition  
     the new constitutional framework  
     party systems  
     the development of civil society and non-state mediating institutions  
     the economic transition from a state-planned to a market economy   
     the challenges that the social problems of systemic change pose in the area of social policy  
     The module concludes by examining the impact of regional co-operation and the integration of post-communist states with the European political, economic and security structures   
    
   
   
    
     This module aims to:  
    
   
   
   
    
     equip students with a thorough understanding of the political development during communism and especially during and since the transition to democracy in East-Central Europe  
     develop an understanding of the problems and opportunities created by the eastward enlargement of the EU and NATO  
     equip students with a sound grasp of the specialised literature on East-Central Europe and the comparative politics literature relevant to East-Central European countries   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Politics of Ethnic Conflict 
  
  
  
    Questions relating to nationalism and ethnic conflict have become more prominent in political debate since the end of the Cold War, and the invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan demonstrated the continuing importance of constitutional crafting as a means to manage ethnic diversity within states.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This module evaluates differing definitions of the ‘nation’ and ‘ethnic group’, examines different state strategies to manage diversity such as multiculturalism, assimilation and integration, and considers different explanations of conflict between different ethnic groups.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It then examines in more detail strategies adopted by particular states to manage their diversity.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The countries of India, America, France, Afghanistan, the UK, and Germany are focused upon, but students are encouraged to use material relating to other countries if they have particular knowledge of these cases.   
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     offer a critical overview of a range of approaches to understanding concepts of nationalism and ethnicity  
     introduce students to the different strategies of ethnic conflict regulation  
     offer students the opportunity to assess critically how these strategies are applied in various states  
     encourage students to consider the comparative implications of the strategies discussed   
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Rights and Wrongs of Climate Change 
  
  
  
    What should the world do about climate change? How should we proceed in the face of persistent claims that it won't do serious harm, or isn't occurring at all?  
   
   
    
   
  
    Should poor countries as well as rich ones be obliged to cut their carbon emissions? Is it wrong for individuals to fly? What if you offset your flight? How much weight should we accord harm that may come many years in the future?  
   
   
    
   
  
    Arguments about climate change raise many of the most controversial issues in contemporary ethics and political theory. This module will examine these debates and the broader questions they hinge on. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
    
    
     familiarise students with some of the key debates surrounding climate change  
     expand students' knowledge of moral philosophy, political theory and environmental ethics