Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff. They’re also shaped by new developments in industry and as a consequence, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules on offer.  
  
  Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory 
   
  
    Engineering Mathematics 1 
   
   
   
     This module introduces the algebra of complex numbers to provide a key mathematical tool for analysis of linear mathematical and engineering problems. The complexity of solving general systems of equations is introduced and their study using matrix techniques. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and workshops. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Engineering Mathematics 2 
   
   
   
     You’ll be introduced to techniques for solving selected first-order and second-order differential equations relevant to the analysis of generic engineering problems. The module also provides mathematical tools in terms of advanced differential calculus and vectors for modelling of generic engineering situations given in terms of multi-dimensional models. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and workshops. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Industrial Design 
   
   
   
     This module will provide you with an introduction to Industrial Design, a brief history of its leading practitioners and its impact on popular culture, the role of the designer and ethical responsibilities, design methodology and design project case studies.  You’ll spend 1 hour in lectures and one hour in seminars each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Design and Manufacture 1 
   
   
   
     This year long module introduces students to basic concepts and practice of design and manufacture and includes the following topics: The process of design supported by practical design activities; Engineering drawing; Solid modelling and drawing generation; Machine shop practical training; Machine elements, machining processes; Metrology. You’ll spend three hours in lectures, three hours in computing, three hours in workshops and three hours in every week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Materials and Materials Forming 
   
   
   
     The module gives a broad introduction to the properties and processing of materials used in engineering applications and is intended to provide a course in engineering materials for students with no previous background in the subject. The final section of the module covers failure of materials, and seeks to cover the main failure mechanisms which a designer will be concerned with (overload, fracture, creep, fatigue etc). You’ll spend two hours in lectures and six hours in practicals each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Mechanics of Solids 1 
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to introduce students to fundamental concepts and principles of solid mechanics and their applications to simple engineering problems. By the end of the module you will be able to comprehend the fundamental concepts of solid mechanics and apply these concepts to simplified engineering scenarios. You’ll spend two hours in lectures, six hours in practicals and one hour in a seminar each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Professional Studies 
   
   
   
     The module covers a number of global and ethical issues relating to engineering .The module introduces many of the key transferable skills required by engineers (and others) within the context of these issues, including: report writing; literature searching and presentation skills. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and five hours in seminars each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Creative Techniques in Design 
   
   
   
     This module will teach and develop a range of creative skills for use in product design. Students will be introduced to creative theory and the creative processes central to the work of the designer. Observational studies will be undertaken to inspire and inform creative activity. You’ll spend one hour in lectures, supplemented by three hours of practicals each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Dynamics of Mechanical Systems 
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to introduce students to fundamental concepts and principles of dynamics and their application to mechanical engineering systems. You will recognise and construct an appropriate analysis technique to apply when presented with a simple engineering scenario in a dynamics context. You’ll spend one hour in lectures, two hours in practicals and 1 hour in tutorials each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Drawing For Design 
   
   
   
     This module will teach and develop skills in drawing. It will take students from the basics of sketching as taught in a previous module to further develop their skills in representing three dimensional forms in perspective. Students will progressively learn to add detail to their drawings in terms of form and tone and texture. This module consists of three hours of practicals each week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Near Net Shape Manufacture 
   
   
   
     This module examines modern manufacturing techniques currently being exploited within industry which results in near net shape parts. You will be provided with the essential knowledge which will enable you to understand common place and emerging near net shape manufacturing techniques. You’ll spend three hours in lectures and one hour in seminars each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Automated Manufacture 
   
   
   
     This module will give an understanding of the need for automation and robotics in manufacturing industry. You will be introduced to the fundamental concepts of automated manufacture, the role of automation in manufacturing, and its advantages and limitations. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and four hours in seminars each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Design for Manufacture 
   
   
   
     The aim of this module is to develop knowledge, understanding and practical skills in Design for Manufacturing and Manufacturing and Product Development. It covers design for manufacturability, design for assembly, rapid prototyping and manufacturing, jigs and fixtures, process planning and group technology and design for cost. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and three hours in practicals each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Production and Inventory Management 
   
   
   
     This module describes the main factors which influence the needs of a manufacturing control (production and inventory control) system including the market, the manufacturing and information processing technology and the skills of the workforce. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Marketing B 
   
   
   
     This module is primarily intended for non-Business School students. This module aims to introduce the concept of marketing as an approach to business and to discuss the nature of marketing strategy. You’ll investigate the challenges of managing the marketing mix. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and one hour in a seminar each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Computer Modelling Systems 
   
   
   
     This module will teach and develop knowledge and skills in the uses of two types of software: Computer aided design software and computer animation and visualisation software. Students are taught free form surface modelling and other advanced modelling techniques in Pro E. In 3D Studio Max you are taught to produce photo realistic images from CAD data. You’ll spend two hours in practicals each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Design Visualisation Techniques 
   
   
   
     The module enables students to develop their visual presentation skills of design concepts and ideas. It aims to introduce students to a range of presentation techniques and media including hand rendered/drawing techniques as well as computer based digital techniques. You’ll spend three hours in practicals each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Second Year Design Projects 
   
   
   
     This is a project based module for Product Design and Manufacture students in their second year. Through practical design work the students will be faced with the problems of managing different constraints and producing cohesive design proposals. The students will become familiar with the process of receiving design briefs, managing time and resources and presenting design solutions. You’ll spend 12 hours in practicals and eight hours in further activity sessions each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Second Year Group Design Project 
   
   
   
     This is a project based module for Product Design and Manufacture students in their second year. The module comprises an individual and a group design project. Through practical design work the students will be faced with the problems of managing differing constraints, possibly conflicting views and workload management to produce a cohesive design proposal. You’ll spend 10 hours in practicals and four hours in further activity sessions each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Ergonomics in Design 
   
   
   
     This module aims to introduce the cognitive, physical, environmental and organisational bases of ergonomics/human factors. The course will provide knowledge and understanding of when an ergonomics intervention is required and how to manage, organise and evaluate such a programme. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Management Studies 1 
   
   
   
     This module introduces students to modern management methods relevant to the running of a company. Topics include: Introduction to basic economics; the essential requirements and aims of a business; preparing a business plan; accounting; interpretation of accounts; programme management; the essentials of “lean” manufacture and the management of innovation. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Physical Ergonomics 
   
   
   
     This module aims to equip students with fundamental knowledge and skills regarding the physical characteristics of people (body size, strength, flexibility, etc.) and environments (lighting, thermal, sound, etc.) as they relate to the design of products, workplaces and tasks/jobs. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Investigatory Methods for Innovation in Engineering and Management 
   
   
   
     This module will introduce a range of methods & methodologies for studies relevant to innovation in Manufacturing and Product Development. Students will visit several companies to understand in depth how they operate and are organised. You’ll spend eight hours in lectures and time on fieldtrips each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Rapid Product Development 
   
   
   
     This module will cover a range of technologies involved in modern product development and the support systems needed to help reduce development time and cost of products and assemblies. The aim of this module is to study in detail a range of rapid product development tools and technologies including specific process principles and engineering applications. You’ll spend two hours in lectures, two hours in seminars and time on a fieldtrip each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Third Year MEng Product Design Projects 
   
   
   
     This module comprises of 4 projects. Through practical design work the students will be faced with the problems of managing different constraints and producing cohesive design proposals. You’ll spend 12 hours working practically each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Manufacturing Process Capability 
   
   
   
     The module will give students in depth understanding of technical capability of modern manufacturing processes in relation to product design. The aim of the module is to develop students’ abilities to understand and assess the capability of single and combined manufacturing processes. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and two hours in seminars each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional Students must take 10 credits from this group.
   
   
  
    Management Studies 2 
   
   
   
     On completion of this module you will be able to understand how projects are selected and financially evaluated. You'll be able to construct and monitor the elements of an engineering or business programme and acquire an ability to manage risks and quality issues in the industrial and business context. You'll develop an understanding of the basics of English Law. You’ll spend two hours in lectures in tutorials each week when studying this module.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Simulation and Digital Human Modelling 
   
   
   
     This module aims to equip students with the knowledge and skills required to use digital human modelling and systems simulation approaches in Human Factors research and design/evaluation work. In addition, the module aims to provide students with an understanding of the fundamental assumptions upon which digital human modelling and simulation tools are based and their primary capabilities and limitations. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and two hours in practicals each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Processing of Engineering Alloys 
   
   
   
     This module covers the principles and practice related to processing, structure and properties of engineering alloys. The emphasis is on understanding the importance of process control to achieve desired properties through the formation of correct microstructural features. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Computer Aided Engineering 
   
   
   
     This module will enable you to create, display and analyse complex forms and assemblies. Various elements of CAE will be covered including, solid & surface modelling, rendering and analysis. Review of the CAE software and industry. You’ll spend three hours in practicals each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Sustainable Manufacturing 
   
   
   
     This module aims to provide you with the knowledge of key environmental and sustainability issues that are relevant to modern manufacturing. It also aims to provide a set of tools and skills that may be used to design, analyse, and improve manufacturing processes, products, and business operations. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Polymer Engineering 
   
   
   
     This module will allow you to gain an understanding of the chemistry of polymers, the routes to polymerisation and their effect on the material; the rheology of polymer melts, the basics of the main polymer processing operations, and the interaction between rheology and processing; the mechanical properties of polymers. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and one hour in a seminar each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  AND 10 credits from this group
   
   
  
    Fibre Reinforced Composites Engineering 
   
   
   
     This module will give you an introduction to fibre reinforced composite materials. You will study the design, manufacture and performance of fibre-reinforced composite materials. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
     
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Human-Computer Systems 
   
   
   
     This module will provide students with a thorough understanding of the growth of IT and human computer systems. To examine the concepts and methods available for the analysis, design and evaluation of computer-based interfaces through hardware, software, task and systems design. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Lean Manufacturing 
   
   
   
     This module will provide you with knowledge and understanding of Lean Manufacturing principles related to all transactional and non-transactional processes. You will apply knowledge and understanding of waste to unfamiliar production practices and environments. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Joining Technology 
   
   
   
     This module examines, in depth, the processes used for joining metallic (e.g. steel, aluminium and titanium alloys) and non-metallic (e.g. polymers and fibre reinforced composites) materials. The module will provide you with an understanding of the fundamental concepts of joining technologies. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Intelligent Fixturing and Tooling Design 
   
   
   
     The module focuses on engineering principles, methodologies, design and use of tooling and fixturing as an integral part of the manufacturing productions systems. The aims of this module are to develop knowledge, understanding and practical skills in intelligent tooling, work holding and fixturing systems for manufacture. You’ll spend two hours in lectures and two hours in practicals each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory
   
   
  
    Cognitive Ergonomics in Design 
   
   
   
     This module will provide you with a thorough understanding of cognitive ergonomics and the way in which the consideration of cognitive ergonomics can impact on human performance in the workplace. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Company Review and Project Outline 
   
   
   
     This is an individual report-based module which seeks to develop the student’s ability to be resourceful in research, think critically, plan and present on a piece of work at a professional level. The module prepares the student for their final year project by asking them to produce a detailed document covering the commercial/manufacturing constraints of a company. You’ll spend two hours in tutorials each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Major Project with Industry 
   
   
   
     The develops and showcases the design skills of the student. The project will look in detail at the design solution and the manufacturing of the product. The project will be carried out in conjunction with the student’s company review which will bring a great deal of realism to the project. This work will form the basis of the end of course exhibition. You’ll spend 20 hours working practically each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Fourth Year MEng Product Design Projects 
   
   
   
     This is a project based module for Product Design and Manufacture. The module comprises of two projects. Specifically; in the first project, students will further develop ‘People Centred Research’ skills to find creative approaches that are innovative. In the second project, students will work for a “client” presenting concepts for their client’s selection. You’ll spend 12 hours working practically each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Managing Projects 
   
   
   
     The module introduces fundamental concepts in project management. Students will gain understanding of the scope and variety of project types, understand key variables in project management and learn methods, techniques and approaches that are important in successfully managing projects to meet objectives in a wide range of contexts. You’ll spend two hours in computing sessions and two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
  Optional
   Students must take 20 credits from this group. Year Three optional modules that students have not previously taken are also available.
   
   
  
    Conservation and Recycling of Materials 
   
   
   
     This module will develop an appreciation of the world resources of materials, and of the factors affecting their patterns of consumption. The economics and technologies of waste disposal and of materials recycling will be examined in relation to the value to be gained by recycling. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Systems Engineering and Human Factors 
   
   
   
     The aims of the module are to enable students to understand the nature of systems. You will be introduced to systems engineering and you will learn methods of establishing and representing systems requirements to feed into the design process. You’ll spend two hours in lectures each week when studying this module.