Modules  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
  
    Architectural Urbanism Studio 
   
  
    This module is a design studio that aims to develop architectural design and critical thinking skills to an advanced level. Its activities follow a design process, in which analytical investigations and research explorations into a particular theme, site and research problem are duly applied to inform the development of architectural proposals. 
    Students have a choice of studio units, each of which embodies a distinct approach derived from their specific thematic focus and research specialism, such as Urban Building, Tectonics + Fabrication or Humanities.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Design, Culture and Context 
   
  
    This lecture and seminar module aims to support the development of architectural thinking to an advanced level through a critical examination of architectural culture. It introduces key critical thinkers such as Bourdieu, Freire, Foucault, Merleau-Ponty and Heidegger, and historians from the high modernists such as Pevsner and Giedion, through Banham to Jencks. It discusses architecture in relation to its institutions like the magazine and the competition, as well as architectural education, and you will critically reflect on your own position within architectural culture.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Theory and Research in Architecture 
   
  
    The module gives you an opportunity to develop original research within a specialist area. It aims to develop your capacities for reasoning and critical analysis about the spatial, aesthetic, technical and social qualities of architecture within the scope and scale of a wider environment. It gives guidance on how to develop a reasoned argument that contributes to the discourse of architecture in its cultural context.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Environment and Technology 
   
  
    This lecture-based module - supported by weekly workshops - aims to develop practical knowledge, understanding and ability of the environmental, construction, structural and technological dimensions of architectural design. The module is designed to support practical applications in the studio, reinforcing skills in the integrative nature of architectural design. The assessment for this module is based on the evaluation of environmental, construction, structural and technological worksheets - to be developed as ‘in class exercises’ at weekly workshops - and on a final technical report linking the contents analysed in the lecture and practiced in the workshops with the design studio project developed in the context of the co-requisite module 'Architectural Urbanism Studio'.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Professional Studies 
   
  
    The module gives an overview of architectural practice and management and construction law. In detail this will cover professionalism, CPD, business management, finance, communication, building procurement routes and contractual arrangements, the RIBA work stages, risk management and the building team. The legal framework, sources of law, the legal system, arbitration and dispute resolution routes will be explored, along with contract formation, construction risks, tort and negligence generally, and professional negligence. In particular, reference will be made to CDM legislation and universal access legislation.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Architectural Design Studio 
   
  
    This design studio aims to develop your core design, critical thinking and application skills as prescribed by the ARB/RIBA for Part II students. Its end result is the production of a Comprehensive Design Project. 
    The studio’s main project is structured by a rigorous design process that leads progressively from analytical investigations into site, programme and context, through to synthesis of a summary concept, which is ultimately applied towards resolving a complex building programme. With an emphasis on an integrative design approach, you are encouraged to test emerging proposals during each work stage, and to draw on specialist technical and environmental design input from core sources and from co-requisite module . In this endeavour, teaching support is provided to augment relevant knowledge and skills that will enable you to develop and to represent your architectural proposals.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  
    Diploma thesis Studio 
   
   
    This year-long studio design module aims to develop architectural skills to an advanced level. Within the module there is the opportunity to select from a range of different design research studios that are introduced at the beginning of the year. Each design research studio will have its own structure and theme and will develop particular knowledge and skills in addition to the general module aims and learning outcomes. The module also allows you to identify a topic of interest related to architecture and to formulate a thesis that will be developed into a design research thesis. You will be expected to plan a programme of independent study and to undertake relevant research into their chosen topic.