Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
  
    Social Psychology 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the core topics in social psychology which is concerned with trying to understand the social behaviour of individuals in terms of both internal characteristics of the person (e.g. cognitive mental processes) and external influences (the social environment). Lectures will cover topics on how we define the self, attitudes, attribution, obedience, aggression, pro-social behaviour and formation of friendships. You’ll have an hour of both lecture and seminar time per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Practical Methods in Psychology 
   
   
    This year-long module provides you with an integrative approach to psychology through the use of scientific method. You’ll address several different psychological topics using a range of investigative procedures, primarily based on the experimental method. The module will enable you to critically assess previous research and to design, conduct, analyse and report on your own studies. You’ll learn how to use computer software for and be expected to be a participant in another person’s study. For this module you’ll have a three hour practical class plus a two-hour seminar weekly.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Developmental Psychology 
   
   
    In this module you’ll receive an introduction to the fascinating world of the developing child. Lectures consider different theoretical, applied and experimental approaches to cognitive, linguistic and social developmental from early to late childhood. Topics include the development of thinking, perception, drawing, understanding the mind, intelligence, attachment, language, and moral development. You’ll have an hour-long lecture weekly plus five tutorials throughout the semester.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Statistical Methods 1 
   
   
    This full-year module introduces you to basic issues in research design, and to the statistical representation and analysis of data, with the aid of software called the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS). You’ll be provided with an understanding of the issues underlying experimental and correlational research designs. You’ll learn to use SPSS to accurately describe research data and for the use of designing research hypotheses. You’ll have a one-hour lecture weekly.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cognitive Psychology 1 
   
   
    Cognitive psychology is the study of mental processes and this module will provide an introduction to the methods used by cognitive psychologists in their investigations of mental processes in humans. A wide range of mental processes will be discussed, with some introductory discussion of how they limit human performance in applied contexts. The mental processes to be discussed include those that support attention, perception, language, memory and thinking processes. You’ll have two 1-hour lectures for this module plus three tutorials throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Biological Psychology 
   
   
    This module will give you an introduction to the neural and biological bases of cognitive and other behaviour. You will learn about the structure and evolution of the brain and the main functions of the different part. You’ll examine how the brain receives, transmits and processes information at the neural level as well as its visual pathways. The main scientific methods for investigating brain and behaviour will also be covered. You’ll have two hours of lectures weekly plus three hour-long tutorials throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
  
    The Nature of Meaning 
   
   
    In this module you’ll explore various theories of naming, with a focus on the works of Frege, Russell and Kripke. You’ll learn about the puzzles concerning the nature of meaning including truth-conditional semantics and how this links with the terms ‘I’, ‘now’ and ‘here’. You’ll have two hours of lectures and an hour-long seminar per week, with an extra four hour long lectures throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Practical and Statistical Methods 2 for Joint Honours 
   
   
    This module consists of two components: practical methods classes and statistical methods lectures. You’ll work in small groups to design, conduct, analyse and report on extended practical projects. You’ll learn about ANOVA, the most commonly used statistical technique in experimental psychology, which will provide an understanding of how to perform univariate, multivariate and trend analysis. You’ll also be taught how to analyse data using software such as SPSS, Experstat and Excel. Statistical methods lectures will cover important statistical techniques, with a strong focus on ANOVA models.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Conceptual and Historical Issues in Psychology 
   
   
    In this module you’ll discuss the scientific, historical and philosophical underpinnings of psychology as a discipline which will demonstrate the inherent variability and diversity in the theoretical approaches to psychology. You’ll have a good knowledge and critical understanding of the influences of history on psychological theories by the end of the module. For this module there’ll be two hours of lectures per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Social and Developmental Psychology 
   
   
    In this module you’ll examine theories and experimental studies of social processes and human development. Many topics relating to social processes will be covered including: social cognition and social thinking, conformity and obedience, intergroup behaviour, theories of attraction and relationships, prosocial behaviour and intrinsic motivation, and self-determination among others. Human development topics are also explored in depth such as the development of phonology, the importance of social referencing in early language acquisition and at typical socio-cognitive development in people with autism.  You’ll have two hours of lectures weekly for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Personality and Individual Differences 
   
   
    In this module you’ll cover the psychological explanations of personality and individual differences. The relationship between the individual and society will be highlighted, in particular the major personality theories are considered in detail and the application of these theories to areas such as abnormal psychology, criminal behaviour and health are discussed. IQ is also covered along with the evolutionary bases of traits. You’ll have two hours of lectures per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
  
    Mini-Research Project 3B 
   
   
    In this module you will agree on a topic for investigation with a supervisor and submit outline plans of the methods, design and analysis to be used. All research projects should involve either empirical work or computational modelling. Projects need not be original - replications and extensions of published work are acceptable. For this module you’re expected to critically analyse the work reported on your topic and design a research programme designed aimed at developing a particular a particular research area.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Understanding Patterns of Action 
   
   
   
     This module will include theoretical, methodological and substantive issues to do with how people without knowledge of psychology understand each other (attribution theory). You’ll discuss the techniques that psychologists and researchers in neighbouring disciplines have developed for analysing and understanding the actions they observe. You’ll have a three hour lecture per week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Free Will and Action 
   
   
    
    This module aims to examine some of the main philosophical issues concerning the nature and explanation of action and the requirements for free action and free will. You’ll conduct a study of some formative works and some recent contributions to the debates on these topics. Through a critical study of these topics, your skills in the analysis, evaluation, and presentation of arguments will also be enhanced. You’ll have two hours of lectures plus an hour-long seminar weekly.   
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Ethics 
   
  
    Environmental ethics addresses the issue of how human beings should interact with the non-human natural world. This module will cover a range of topics from contemporary philosophical literature on environmental ethics. You’ll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar per week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Conceptual and Historical Issues in Psychology 
   
  
    In this module you’ll examine the conceptual and historical foundations of psychology, taking into consideration contributions from ancient Greek, Medieval, renaissance, and 18th, 19th and 20th century thinkers. You’ll focus on the relationship between the body and mind and the nature of consciousness. Throughout the module you’ll also discuss the relationship between the individual and society. There will be a two-hour lecture per week for this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Metaphysics 
   
  
    In this module you’ll discuss several advance topics in metaphysics. The module will cover a broad range of topics including existence, nothingness and truthmaking, and truthmakers. Theories of substance, identity, constitution and composition will be explored, among others to enhance the skills required to carry out research in philosophy.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Mechanisms of Learning and Psychopathology 
   
  
    Supported by lectures, seminars and tutorials, this module aims to provide you with an understanding of the mechanisms of learning and memory in human and non-human animals, and an analysis of pathological conditions involving these systems. You’ll study topics that include: perceptual learning, the contextual and attentional modulation of learning and behaviour as well as more neuroscientifically focused topics such as the role of the hippocampus in memory. Clinical topics include: the acquisition of phobias, memory discords, the psychological side effects of cancer treatment, and depression.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Altruism, Cooperation and Helping 
   
  
    The course will cover theories and models of altruism, cooperation and helping from the perspective of psychology, economics and evolutionary biology. The course will consider why people sometimes don’t help and actively try to benefit from others (e.g., Free-riding) and apply these models to anti-social behaviour, and how we cooperate to inflict injury on other groups. You’ll also examine models of helping others, but also why people ask for help. You’ll look at how charities implement some of these principles and if they are successful. There will be two hours per week of lectures for this module.