Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   
    Social Psychology  
   
   
    This module introduces you to the core topics in social psychology which is concerned with trying to understand the social behaviour of individuals in terms of both internal characteristics of the person (e.g. cognitive mental processes) and external influences (the social environment). Lectures will cover topics on how we define the self, attitudes, attribution, obedience, aggression, pro-social behaviour and formation of friendships. You’ll have an hour of both lecture and seminar time per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Practical Methods in Psychology   
   
   
    This year-long module provides you with an integrative approach to psychology through the use of scientific method. You’ll address several different psychological topics using a range of investigative procedures, primarily based on the experimental method. The module will enable you to critically assess previous research and to design, conduct, analyse and report on your own studies. You’ll learn how to use computer software for and be expected to be a participant in another person’s study. For this module you’ll have a three hour practical class plus a two-hour seminar weekly.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Developmental Psychology  
   
   
    In this module you’ll receive an introduction to the fascinating world of the developing child. Lectures consider different theoretical, applied and experimental approaches to cognitive, linguistic and social developmental from early to late childhood. Topics include the development of thinking, perception, drawing, understanding the mind, intelligence, attachment, language, and moral development. You’ll have an hour-long lecture weekly plus five tutorials throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Statistical Methods 1  
   
   
    This full-year module introduces you to basic issues in research design, and to the statistical representation and analysis of data, with the aid of software called the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS). You’ll be provided with an understanding of the issues underlying experimental and correlational research designs. You’ll learn to use SPSS to accurately describe research data and for the use of designing research hypotheses. You’ll have a one-hour lecture weekly.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Cognitive Psychology 1  
   
   
    Cognitive psychology is the study of mental processes and this module will provide an introduction to the methods used by cognitive psychologists in their investigations of mental processes in humans. A wide range of mental processes will be discussed, with some introductory discussion of how they limit human performance in applied contexts. The mental processes to be discussed include those that support attention, perception, language, memory and thinking processes. You’ll have two 1-hour lectures for this module plus three tutorials throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Biological Psychology  
   
   
    This module will give you an introduction to the neural and biological bases of cognitive and other behaviour. You will learn about the structure and evolution of the brain and the main functions of the different part. You’ll examine how the brain receives, transmits and processes information at the neural level as well as its visual pathways. The main scientific methods for investigating brain and behaviour will also be covered. You’ll have two hours of lectures weekly plus three hour-long tutorials throughout the semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   
    Conceptual and Historical Issues in Psychology  
   
  
      
    In this module you’ll discuss the scientific, historical and philosophical underpinnings of psychology as a discipline which will demonstrate the inherent variability and diversity in the theoretical approaches to psychology. You’ll have a good knowledge and critical understanding of the influences of history on psychological theories by the end of the module. For this module there’ll be two hours of lectures per week.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Social and Developmental Psychology  
   
   
    In this module you’ll examine theories and experimental studies of social processes and human development. Many topics relating to social processes will be covered including: social cognition and social thinking, conformity and obedience, intergroup behaviour, theories of attraction and relationships, prosocial behaviour and intrinsic motivation, and self-determination among others. Human development topics are also explored in depth such as the development of phonology, the importance of social referencing in early language acquisition and at typical socio-cognitive development in people with autism.  You’ll have two hours of lectures weekly for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Neuroscience and Behaviour  
   
   
     This module will cover several issues in neuroscience and behaviour that are particularly relevant to understanding the biological bases of psychological functions. Among the topics to be covered are: psychopharmacology, psychobiological explanations of mental disorders, dementia, sexual development and behaviour and methods of studying neuropsychological processes. You’ll also examine the effects of brain damage on mental functioning including amnesias, agnosias and aphasias among other topics. You’ll have four hours per week of lectures for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Cognitive Psychology 2  
   
   
    This module will examine perception with particular emphasis on vision, but also hearing, taste, touch and smell. The Psychology of Language will be discussed including linguistic theory, speech, parsing, word meaning, and language production. Other topics covered are: the psychology of reading, human memory, and thinking and problem solving. For each topic you’ll explore existing theories and contemporary issues to enable you to take an interdisciplinary perspective of them all. You’ll have a two-hour lecture per week for this module.   
   
  
      
   
   
    Personality and Individual Differences  
   
   
     In this module you’ll cover the psychological explanations of personality and individual differences. The relationship between the individual and society will be highlighted, in particular the major personality theories are considered in detail and the application of these theories to areas such as abnormal psychology, criminal behaviour and health are discussed. IQ is also covered along with the evolutionary bases of traits. You’ll have two hours of lectures per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Practical and Statistical Methods 2  
   
   
    This full-year practical module is designed to give you hands-on experience with designing, running, analysing and reporting scientific experiments. These practical skills complement the theoretical concepts taught in the concurrent statistical courses. You’ll also gain the ability to conduct and evaluate scientific studies within a small group. You’ll learn how to interpret statistical output such as SPSS printouts, and understand the implications of main effects and interactions. You’ll have a two-hour practical session per week studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Statistical Methods 2  
   
   
    In this module you’ll cover the basic concepts and assumptions with respect to univariate and multivariate statistics, as well as issues relating to field studies, ethics, the reliability and validity issues as well as basic qualitative techniques. The module will cover ANOVA (specialist psychology computing software), post-hoc tests, power, multiple linear regression, factor analysis, the nature of causality and field designs (both experimental and quasi-experimental), ethics, the reliability and validity of measures and field designs, as well as exploring some basic issues in questionnaire design and qualitative methods. You’ll have an hour per week of lectures for this module  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
   
    Research Project  
   
   
    This module will give you the chance to work individually to carry out an extended piece of research. You’ll agree an area of research with your supervisor and carry out self-directed analysis. The work will be either empirical or computational in nature to test a hypothesis which can be original, or you can extend or replicate an existing project.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Typical Optional Modules  
   
   
    
     Psychology of Digital Technology  
    
    
     In this module you’ll be introduced to current issues in the design, evaluation and use of the information in the work place. You’ll cover theoretical approaches to cognition Human Computer Interaction (HCI) design methods, how new technologies shape organisations, and ways that the usability of technology can be assessed. There will also be discussion on why technologies are not always beneficial. You’ll have two hours of lecture weekly for this module.   
    
   
       
    
    
     Cognitive Development and Learning  
    
    
     This module will cover modern versions of nativist and empiricist theories of cognitive development. It will provide an evaluation of these theories using behavioural, clinical and neuro-physiological evidence from a range of domains including understanding of numbers, conceptions of the physical world, drawing and musical skills, spoken and written language development and perceptual development. You’ll have two hours of lecture per week for this module.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Forensic and Mental Health  
    
    
     In this module you’ll receive an introduction in this growing area of psychology, with a focus on criminality. The module will concentrate on offending behaviours, typical categorisation of those who commit crimes or harm themselves, standard interventions for offenders and the neuroscience of offending. The course will also cover the current research on specific offending behaviours, and examine the role of the criminal justice system and health service in dealing with individuals who offend. You’ll have two hours of lectures per week for this module.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Clinical Psychology  
    
    
     The aim of this course is to introduce you to the concept of abnormal psychology and the application of psychology in clinical settings. The course will illustrate how psychological models are developed and how they are applied in developing interventions. The emphasis will be on examining theory and evaluation of interventions for a number of disorders/clinical issues. During this module you’ll have two hours of lectures weekly.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Altruism, Cooperation and Helping  
    
    
     The course will cover theories and models of altruism, cooperation and helping from the perspective of psychology, economics and evolutionary biology. The course will consider why people sometimes don’t help and actively try to benefit from others (e.g., Free-riding) and apply these models to anti-social behaviour, and how we cooperate to inflict injury on other groups. You’ll also examine models of helping others, but also why people ask for help. You’ll look at how charities implement some of these principles and if they are successful. There will be two hours per week of lectures for this module.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Neuropsychology of action: The body in the brain  
    
    
     In this module you’ll examine the psychological and neural basis for the planning and control of human action, with a focus on hand-directed movements. You’ll have an introduction to scientific research and will learn the multi-disciplinary nature of research into human behaviour. This module will give you an insight into the areas of experimental psychology, neurophysiology, neuroanatomy, neuropsychology, and functional brain-imaging. You’ll have two hours of lectures weekly.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Educational Psychology 
    
    
     This course provides an introduction to the contexts in which educational psychologists operate by examining the historical development of this profession within a set of major legislative and policy contexts, such as the recent drive to increase social inclusion. The module will concentrate on assessment and intervention work with specific populations such as young people who display challenging behaviour in schools, vulnerable adolescents, and bilingual learners. You’ll also examine psychological approaches to group work with teachers and pupils as well as the application of system theory in helping transform aspects of schools and other organisations. There will be two hour lectures per week for this module.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Neuropsychology and Applied Neuroimaging   
    
    
     In this module you’ll examine the deficits seen in individuals who have suffered brain damage. You will learn about the impairments of language, memory, perception, attention, motor control, executive control and emotion. This course evaluates both the clinical and theoretical aspects of these syndromes. In particular, you will evaluate the implications regarding how the healthy brain functions. There is two hours per week of lectures for this module.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Mechanisms of Learning and Psychopathology  
    
    
     Supported by lectures, seminars and tutorials, this module aims to provide you with an understanding of the mechanisms of learning and memory in human and non-human animals, and an analysis of pathological conditions involving these systems. You’ll study topics that include: perceptual learning, the contextual and attentional modulation of learning and behaviour as well as more neuroscientifically focused topics such as the role of the hippocampus in memory. Clinical topics include: the acquisition of phobias, memory discords, the psychological side effects of cancer treatment, and depression.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
   Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
   
    Advanced Methods in Psychology  
   
  
    This module provides an insight into some more advanced or specialised techniques of data collection, organisation and analysis in psychological research (e.g., eye-tracking, EEG, fMRI, TMS, computational modeling, diary methodologies). Workshops and lectures will include implementation of analytical procedures, for example specialised data management and statistical packages, and on specialised data gathering equipment and software. 
   
  
      
   
   
    Functional Imaging Methods  
   
  
    This module presents functional imaging methods. Recently developed non-invasive methods for human cognitive neuroscience will be discussed with respect to their strengths and limitations. The module covers functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), structural MRI (voxel-based morphometry), diffusion-tensor imaging (DTI), magnetoencephalography (MEG), electroencephalography (EEG) and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Professional Skills  
   
  
    This module covers general research skills and personal development skills. It contains a number of workshops examining areas such as presentation and writing skills, careers, understanding the wider context of research, consultancy, and practical and ethical issues, along with appropriate Graduate School courses.