Modules  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Great Religious Texts 1 
   
   
    In this unique module you’ll read and discuss a wide range of important religious works including scriptural, philosophical, theological, and mystical texts. The aim is to explore the scope of the discipline of theology and religious studies and become familiar with a range of central questions as well as the processes of debate and critique. You’ll study primary texts from the Bible, the Qur’an and the Bhagavad-Gita as well as extracts from the work of Plato, Augustine, Anselm and Julian of Norwich, among others. Teaching is carried out through weekly seminar discussions led by your tutor for the module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Great Religious Texts 2 
   
   
    This module follows on from Great Religious Texts 1 and gives you the opportunity to continue to read and discuss a wide range of important religious works including scriptural, philosophical, theological, and mystical texts. The aim is to explore the scope of the discipline of theology and religious studies and become familiar with a range of central questions as well as the processes of debate and critique. You will study works by Kierkegaard, Nietzsche and other well-known figures, and texts ranging from 17th century Sikh hymns through to the Kairos document of 20th century apartheid South Africa. Teaching is carried out through weekly seminar discussions led by your tutor for the module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Christian Thought and Culture to 1600 
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn about the lives and works of some of the main theologians ranging from the first Christian thinker in the 2nd century, up to the Reformation and Counter-Reformation movements of the 16th century. You’ll study figures such as Augustine, Aquinas and Luther, looking at their ideas but also placing them in their broader historical and ecclesiastical context. For this module you’ll have a combination of two hours of lectures and a 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Theology and Ethics in the Modern World 
   
   
    This module introduces the development of Western Christian theology from the Enlightenment to the present. It surveys the challenges posed to Christian faith by modernity and a range of theological responses to these challenges. In this way you’ll deal with central theological and ethical questions arising in the work and historical context of key thinkers such as Descartes, Kant, Schleiermacher, Kierkegaard and Barth. You’ll be taught through two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Bible in Music, Art and Literature 
   
   
    The Bible is one of the bestsellers and its influence on Western culture is unparalleled. This module explores the way in which the Bible is drawn upon in art, music and literature ranging from Jewish synagogue mosaics and early Christian iconography, to contemporary secular films and music. You’ll be encouraged to engage with case studies of works of art and critically consider the way in which art, music and literature function as biblical interpretations. You’ll have a two hour lecture each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy for Theologians 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be given an overview of the most important philosophical ideas, theories and arguments and their relation to religion and theology.  You’ll begin by studying the Greek ‘natural theology’ of the pre-Socratic thinkers and end with the postmodern ‘turn to religion’ of Emmanuel Levinas and Jacques Derrida. For this module you’ll be taught through a combination of two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Islam 
   
   
    This module examines the narrative and textual foundations of the Islamic tradition including the Qur'an, the prophetic tradition and the life of the Prophet Muhammad. You’ll also look at the development and structure of Islamic society, law, doctrine and spirituality through the classical period, and Muslim responses to challenges posed by modernity including questions of gender and the nation state. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Judaism 
   
   
    This module introduces Judaism from the beginnings of its formation to modernity. You’ll study major texts from the Second Temple period and Late Antique Judaism, the major developments of medieval Jewish culture under Islamic and Christian rule, and key topics in early modern and contemporary Judaism. There will be an emphasis on textual strategies of Jewish readings of the Bible and the Bible’s importance as a central religious symbol, particularly in terms of the foundation of the state of Israel. For this module you’ll have a lecture and a seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
  
    The Buddhist Tradition 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the origins, history, principal forms, teachings and practices of the Buddhist tradition. You’ll read extracts from key scriptures, and explore developments in the tradition of Buddhist thought. You’ll spend two hours each week in lectures, examining the historical progress of Buddhism through India, China, and into modernity and the West.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Canon to Creation: History, Literature and Theology of the Hebrew Bible 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the literature, history and interpretation of the Hebrew Bible, also known as the Old Testament. You’ll consider the biblical text as history, literature and scripture in both the Jewish and Christian Traditions. For this module you’ll have a two hour lecture each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the Study of the New Testament 
   
   
    In this module you’ll gain an overview of the texts that makes up the New Testament and cover central methods, topics and issues in studying them including: the formation of the New Testament canon; the Roman, Greek and Jewish background to the New Testament; the development of historical criticism of the Synoptic Gospels; the historicity of the Synoptic Gospels and Acts, and the authenticity of Paul’s letters. You’ll have a total of three hours of lectures each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biblical Greek 1 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the Greek language as used in the New Testament. You’ll gain the ability to understand and translate basic sentences into English by the end of the module. The module is taught through four hours of classes each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biblical Hebrew 1 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the basics of reading Biblical Hebrew. You’ll gain the ability to understand and translate basic sentences into English by the end of the module. You’ll have four hours per week of classes for this module.In addition, a number of optional modules can be chosen from departments other than Theology and Religious Studies.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Theological Ethics: Theory and Practice 
   
   
    This module introduces students to the origins of Christian moral theology in ancient Greek and patristic thought before examining various traditions of theological reflection on the nature of the good life: Biblical ethics, virtue, natural law and divine command. We will also explore the nature of the Church as a moral community orientated towards the good. Against this background, theological approaches to the ethics of medicine, war and political justice will be examined.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Literature and Religion 
   
   
    In this module you’ll first be introduced to the literary genres of the Bible, primarily poetry, myth, parable and gospel narrative. In addition you’ll engage in a historical survey of the way in which a wide range of literary texts engage in religious thought and the way they ‘perform’ or ‘do’ theology. Texts include: Dante’s Commedia, Milton’s Paradise Lost, Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress and Bront&euml;’s Jane Eyre. This module will be taught through three hours of lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Explaining Religion 
   
   
    This module surveys influential modern conceptions of religion and critically examines the theories of knowledge, interpretation, society and culture associated with them. It seeks to address forms of reductionism in the study of religion and to assess the role of religion in various aspects of society and culture. Among the approaches you’ll consider are neurology and evolutionary theories, Augustinian theology and Enlightenment scepticism, sociology, economics and Marxism. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Presentations: Great Religious Debates 
   
  
    Great Religious Debates is part of a pathway - together with Great Religious Texts in the first year and the dissertation in the third year – that is intended to help you to develop your independent study skills and a range of transferable skills. Great Religious Debates develops the theological themes of the seminar-based Great Religious Texts module and is assessed by a presentation relating to one of the texts studied in the earlier module. You will have a weekly two hour seminar for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Dissertation 
   
  
    You will research and write a dissertation on a subject and title selected in consultation with academic staff in the department. You’ll also give a presentation on your research in progress during the course of the spring semester. The presentation will help you to crystallise your ideas and gain a clearer idea of the overall shape of your work in order to help with the writing process and to continue the development of important transferable skills. You will have regular dissertation tutorials with your supervisor, and will attend dissertation presentations during the Spring Semester. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Optional Modules  
  
  
   Year 2 & Year 3  
  
    Virtue Ethics and Literature 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to virtue ethics as an ancient form of moral practice, which has come back into prominence in recent years. Virtue ethics emphasises the lived experience of a tradition and is therefore narrative in character, offering itself naturally to literary embodiment. You’ll study key ancient Greek texts of the virtue tradition including Aristotle's Nichomachaen Ethics as well as works by Theophrastus, Cicero, Aquinas and contemporary reconstruals of the virtue tradition by Alasdair MacIntyre and Stanley Hauerwas. Virtue ethics will then be analysed in literary texts, such as Homer's Iliad, the medieval poem, Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Jane Austen's Mansfield Park and Graham Green's Brighton Rock. You’ll have a one hour lecture as well as two hours of seminars every week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Religion and Fantasy 
   
   
    This module offers an investigation into the rise of the fantasy genre at the precise point at which religion in the western world was challenged by the rise of rationalism, materialism and historical criticism. You’ll analyse a range of literary fantasies and fantastic tales as apologies, theodicies or critiques that seek to address these challenges. Authors studied include George MacDonald, G. K. Chesterton, Charles Williams, J.R.R. Tolkien's and C.S. Lewis. You’ll have three hours of seminars each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Money, Sex and Power: Religion and Critical Theory 
   
   
    This module explore the central questions such as ‘What is religion for?,’ ‘What interests does it serve?,’ and ‘Whether or not religion is 'true', may it be suspected of producing an illusory view of itself?’ You will be introduced to and explore three critical worldviews and their critiques of established religion: psychoanalysis (religion as wish-fulfilment); Marxian critical theory (religion as ideology); and Nietzschean scepticism (religion as will to power). You will examine the view of modern critical theories of religion that it is the drive of money, sex and power which govern the shape of life, and provide a framework for understanding all experience, including pre-eminently that of religion. You’ll have a two hour lecture each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Spirit of Utopia: Critical Theory, Politics and Religion 
   
   
    In this module you’ll trace the development of Critical Theory from its beginnings in the original Frankfurt School, through its American offspring and its German continuation (Habermas, Honneth, Sloterdijk), up to its influence on French deconstruction (Derrida). The name of the module derives from the early work of Ernst Bloch, The Spirit of Utopia, which for the first time fused Marxist and Freudian ‘theories of suspicion’ with the Messianic idiom. You will explore the way that Critical Theory, far from being ‘atheistic,’ is, in fact, deeply influenced by a certain form of religious narrative deriving mostly from the sources of Jewish Messianism. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
   The Philosophy of Religion 
   
   
    In this module you’ll explore significant problems in the philosophy of religion, such as the credibility of the existence of God, the relation between religion and science, the relation between religion and morality, the problem of evil, and the possibility of an after-life. There will also be discussion of significant themes such as the nature of being, of faith, of religious experience, of religious language, and of religious love. You will consider significant thinkers including Plato, Anselm, Aquinas, Hume, Kant, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Freud and Weil. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Body and Soul: Christian Theological Anthropology 
   
   
    This module examines Christian theological understandings of the human person. It begins by exploring the Hebrew scriptures and ancient Greek philosophy in relation to the nature of the soul, the importance of the body and gender. Of central importance is a theological anthropology focused on the imago dei. The module will progress to the study of Christ as the true human and the mediaeval concept of the human person as a microcosm of the cosmos. The latter stages of the module will focus on theological anthropology in the context of modern philosophical anthropologies, modernity's focus on 'mind' and 'consciousness' in the understanding of the human person, and contemporary ethical issues surrounding human 'enhancement' via medical technologies. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Creation 
   
   
    It is a fundamental claim of the Jewish, Christian and Islamic traditions that the universe is not an accident or a brute fact; it is created. In this module we will examine the background to the Christian doctrine of creation in the Hebrew scriptures and ancient Greek philosophy, and explore the concept of causation and divine action within creation. Taking an historical perspective, the module will investigate: the development of the Christian doctrine of creation; the advent of natural science and its theological roots and implications (considering figures such as Galileo and Newton); the effect of the Reformation on our understanding of humanity's relation to the natural world; the rise of 'intelligent design'; and the origins of the environmental crisis. This module will involve a unique mix of scriptural study, philosophy and the history of science and theology and you’ll be taught through three hours of seminars and lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Darwinism 
   
   
    What is Darwinism? Is it metaphysics, a philosophy, or ‘merely’ science. Does it entail atheism? Could it even accommodate theism? This module will explore Darwin’s theory of evolution, outlining its historical development up to the present day and considering the various debates that shaped its formation. You’ll explore the theory’s application in terms of Social-Darwinism, Sociobiology, and Evolutionary Psychology and the consequences this might have for our own self-understanding, and for how we interpret the world. The module is taught by Conor Cunningham, whose recent book Darwin’s Pious Idea and BBC documentary on the topic have ignited much debate. You’ll have two hours of lectures and an one hour seminar each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Love & Death 
   
   
    In this module you’ll engage in a philosophical exploration of the diversity of ways that love and death have been understood in the Western tradition and have been used to give meaning and significance to human life. Starting with the foundations of Plato’s Phaedrus and Apology you will explore issues such as: how morality makes moral action meaningful, whether dying for others is a model of love, whether erotic love and charity are essentially different, and whether human aspiration is driven by anticipation or fear of death. You will encounter elements of Christian theology, philosophy, psychoanalysis and existentialism in the module. You’ll have a combination of two hours of lectures and a one hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Problems of Religious Diversity 
   
   
    Does faith in one religion require the rejection of all others? This module presents you with the opportunity to bring together the diverse things you have learned about religion and to formulate and clarify your own viewpoint. It will provide an opportunity to explore ways of dealing with the variety of commitments to an ultimate viewpoint in the contemporary world. Approaches to other faiths from Christian theology, philosophy, and mysticism will be explored, as well as approaches from other faiths. Attempts to unify world religions will be examined alongside attempts to retain their differences, as well as causes of deep underlying conflicts between faiths. You’ll be taught through a two hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Justice 
   
  
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the history of the main philosophical and theological theories of justice, up to the present day. You’ll focus on a critical assessment of the truth and viability of these theories and the way in which the theme of justice forms a crucial intersection between ethical and political philosophy. You’ll have three hours of seminars each week for this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Doing Theology with Richard Wagner 
   
   
    This unique module involves the study of Wagner’s last stage work, Parsifal. You’ll investigate Wagner’s career, looking at his intellectual, artistic, philosophical, and religious development in its historical context. Topics studied will include: how the main characters of Parsifal encounter Christ; themes of Christology, atonement, predestination, free will, conversion, and the eucharist in the work; Wagner’s relationship to Judaism and the Jewish people; and Parsifal and ‘regeneration’. For this module you will have three hours of seminars each week.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Religion in Nineteenth Century 
   
  
     In this module you’ll explore nineteenth-century religious life and thought in Britain – a period that is often regarded as the last great age of Christian faith, and when Britain was at its height as a world power. You’ll gain an informed understanding of the world from which Christianity in contemporary Britain emerged and cover topics including the concept of church reform, the dynamics of the major Christian denominations, the expansion of the Jewish community, revivalism, worship, church buildings, missions, and education. Teaching is carried out through two hours of lectures and a seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Religion in Twentieth Century 
   
   
    This module investigates religious life and thought in Britain over the course of the 20th Century allowing you to understand further the immediate context of religion in contemporary Britain. Topics covered include: the transition from the Victorian to the modern age; the birth of ecumenism; the impact of the two World Wars on religion; the Second Vatican Council, the secularisation debate, the growth of multiculturalism, the church-state relationship. The module addresses the changing fortunes of the established Churches, the Free Churches and Roman Catholicism, and the patterns of growth of other world religions. You’ll be taught through one 2-hour lecture and a 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Eastern Orthodox Christianity in the Modern World 
   
   
    In this module you will be introduced to the history, theology, and practices of Eastern Orthodox Churches. The history of Orthodox Christianity in the medieval, early modern and contemporary eras will be covered as well as contemporary issues affecting the Orthodox Churches including the relationship between Church and state, the relationship with neighbouring faiths or ideologies, the role of mission, the ordination of women, and teaching on ethical issues.  Special attention will be given to ‘practices’ such as liturgy, asceticism and rituals such as the veneration of holy relics and icons. You’ll be taught through a three hour seminar each week.