Modules  
  
   The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
   
   Typical Year One Modules   
   
   
    Compulsory  
   
     Philosophy for Theologicians 
    
    
     In this module you’ll be given an overview of the most important philosophical ideas, theories and arguments and their relation to religion and theology.  You’ll begin by studying the Greek ‘natural theology’ of the pre-Socractic thinkers and end with the postmodern ‘turn to religion’ of Emmanuel Levinas and Jacques Derrida. For this module you’ll be taught through a combination of two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Theology and Ethics in the Modern World 
    
    
     This module introduces the development of Western Christian theology from the Enlightenment to the present. It surveys the challenges posed to Christian faith by modernity and a range of theological responses to these challenges. In this way you’ll deal with central theological and ethical questions arising in the work and historical context of key thinkers such as Descartes, Kant, Schleiermacher, Kierkegaard and Barth. You’ll be taught through two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Introduction to Judaism 
    
   
     This module introduces Judaism from the beginnings of its formation to modernity. You’ll study major texts from the Second Temple period and Late Antique Judaism, the major developments of medieval Jewish culture under Islamic and Christian rule, and key topics in early modern and contemporary Judaism. There will be an emphasis on textual strategies of Jewish readings of the Bible and the Bible’s importance as a central religious symbol, particularly in terms of the foundation of the state of Israel. For this module you’ll have a lecture and a seminar each week.
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Introduction to Islam 
    
    
     This module examines the narrative and textual foundations of the Islamic tradition including the Qur'an, the prophetic tradition and the life of the Prophet Muhammad. You’ll also look at the development and structure of Islamic society, law, doctrine and spirituality through the classical period, and Muslim responses to challenges posed by modernity including questions of gender and the nation state. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Self, Mind and Body 
    
    
     In this module you’ll be introduced to the important central issues in philosophy of self, mind and body which continue to be debated to present day. You’ll examine Descartes’ Meditations focusing on his thoughts on dualism and mind-body interaction, comparing these with other related topics. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Introduction to Ethics 
    
   
     This module introduces you to some of the main ethical questions studied by philosophers. The first part focuses on some contemporary moral problems (for example, the justification of punishment). The second part of the course looks at some normative ethical theories and concepts that provide ways of approaching such moral problems. The third part of the course considers some challenges to the idea of systematic moral inquiry (such as relativism, egoism and emotivism). You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Reasoning and Argument: An Introduction to Philosophical Method 
    
    
     In this module you’ll learn a series of key skills needed to follow critical methods of philosophical inquiry. The aim is to help you understand the structure and nature of arguments of others and improve your reasoning ability to assist you in your further studies during your course. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on other weeks throughout the semester.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Elementary Logic 
    
    
     This module provides an introduction to modern logic including technical vocabulary required to aide your understanding of modern philosophical work. You’ll discuss the symbolism of modern logic, the theory of the structure of thought and practice translation between symbolism and English. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.  
    
   
       
    
      Optional  
   
     Great Religious Texts 1 
    
    
     In this unique module you’ll read and discuss a wide range of important religious works including scriptural, philosophical, theological, and mystical texts. The aim is to explore the scope of the discipline of theology and religious studies and become familiar with a range of central questions as well as the processes of debate and critique. You’ll study primary texts from the Bible, the Qur’an and the Bhagavad-Gita as well as extracts from the work of Plato, Augustine, Anselm and Julian of Norwich, among others. Teaching is carried out through weekly seminar discussions led by your tutor for the module.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Great Religious Texts 2 
    
    
     This module follows on from Great Religious Texts 1 and gives you the opportunity to continue to read and discuss a wide range of important religious works including scriptural, philosophical, theological, and mystical texts. The aim is to explore the scope of the discipline of theology and religious studies and become familiar with a range of central questions as well as the processes of debate and critique. You will study works by Kierkegaard, Nietzsche and other well-known figures, and texts ranging from 17th century Sikh hymns through to the Kairos document of 20th century apartheid South Africa. Teaching is carried out through weekly seminar discussions led by your tutor for the module.  
    
   
       
    
   
     The Existence of God 
    
    
     This module will examine the basic philosophical issues that concern the existence of God. The lectures will cover such topics including: Cosmological Argument, the Ontological Argument, the Design Argument, and the Problem of Evil. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Applied Ethics 
    
   
      What is the moral status of animals? What are the limits of free speech? What are the moral issues when discussing abortion? Is affirmative action unjust? In this module you will be looking at these and other issues that arise when we try to put ethics into practice. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
     
    
   
       
    
   
     Appearance and Reality 
    
    
     In this module you’ll examine some of the central themes surrounding the work of John Locke, one of the first philosophers who sought to integrate philosophy with our modern scientific worldview. Topics covered include: empiricism and science, perception, justification and scepticism and the nature of objects among others. You’ll have two hours of lectures and on some weeks an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on other weeks throughout the semester.  
    
   
       
    
   
     The Buddhist Tradition 
    
    
     This module will introduce you to the origins, history, principal forms, teachings and practices of the Buddhist tradition. You’ll read extracts from key scriptures, and explore developments in the tradition of Buddhist thought. You’ll spend two hours each week in lectures, examining the historical progress of Buddhism through India, China, and into modernity and the West.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Issues in Feminist Philosophy 
    
    
     This module will provide an introduction to some of the issues discussed in contemporary feminist philosophy, considering a range of sometimes opposing feminist views on topics including: pornography, feminine appearance, and gender roles within the family and in the workplace. You’ll also examine the ways in which feminist writers have shown that matters not traditionally considered political do in fact have political significance. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.  
    
   
       
    
   
     The Bible in Music, Art and Literature 
    
    
     The Bible is one of the bestsellers and its influence on Western culture is unparalleled. This module explores the way in which the Bible is drawn upon in art, music and literature ranging from Jewish synagogue mosaics and early Christian iconography, to contemporary secular films and music. You’ll be encouraged to engage with case studies of works of art and critically consider the way in which art, music and literature function as biblical interpretations. You’ll have a two hour lecture each week for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Plato  
    
    
     This module will discuss a number of problems tackled by Plato. Attention will be given to the development of the theory of the forms, but we will be working towards an understanding of the motivations for the development of this theory which may be found in his moral/political philosophy. You’ll have two hours of lectures for some weeks and a hour-long lecture in others with an hour-long seminar throughout the semester.  
    
   
       
    
    
    Christian Thought and Culture to 1600 
    
    
     In this module you’ll learn about the lives and works of some of the main theologians ranging from the first Christian thinker in the 2nd century, up to the Reformation and Counter-Reformation movements of the 16th century. You’ll study figures such as Augustine, Aquinas and Luther, looking at their ideas but also placing them in their broader historical and ecclesiastical context. For this module you’ll have a combination of two hours of lectures and a one hour seminar each week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     History of Western Philosophy 
    
    
     Through considering some of the greatest thinkers who have ever lived, you will become familiar with some of the main philosophical ideas which have shaped western analytical philosophy. You will understand how and why these ideas arose and the context in which they were developed. The thinkers which could be covered include: Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, St Augustine, St Aquinas, Hume, among others. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
    
   
       
    
    
    Canon to Creation: History, Literature and Theology of the Hebrew Bible 
    
    
     In this module you’ll be introduced to the literature, history and interpretation of the Hebrew Bible, also known as the Old Testament. You’ll consider the biblical text as history, literature and scripture in both the Jewish and Christian Traditions. For this module you’ll have a two hour lecture each week and a seminar every other week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Introduction to the Study of the New Testament 
    
    
     In this module you’ll gain an overview of the texts that makes up the New Testament and cover central methods, topics and issues in studying them including: the formation of the New Testament canon; the Roman, Greek and Jewish background to the New Testament; the development of historical criticism of the Synoptic Gospels; the historicity of the Synoptic Gospels and Acts, and the authenticity of Paul’s letters. You’ll have a total of three hours of lectures each week for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
  
   
    
   Typical Year Two Modules
    
    
   
   
    Compulsory  
   
     Philosophy of Religion 
    
    
     In this module you’ll explore significant problems in the philosophy of religion, such as the credibility of the existence of God, the relation between religion and science, the relation between religion and morality, the problem of evil, and the possibility of an after-life. There will also be discussion of significant themes such as the nature of being, of faith, of religious experience, of religious language, and of religious love. You will consider significant thinkers including Plato, Anselm, Aquinas, Hume, Kant, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Freud and Weil. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Normative Ethics 
    
    
     You’ll gain an in-depth understanding of the main positions in contemporary normative ethics; their variations, strengths, weaknesses and historical precedents. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Explaining Religion 
    
    
     This module surveys influential modern conceptions of religion and critically examines the theories of knowledge, interpretation, society and culture associated with them. It seeks to address forms of reductionism in the study of religion and to assess the role of religion in various aspects of society and culture. Among the approaches you’ll consider are neurology and evolutionary theories, Augustinian theology and Enlightenment scepticism, sociology, economics and Marxism. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture for this module.   
    
   
       
    
     Optional  
    
    Body and Soul: Human Identity and Ethics 
    
    
     This module examines Christian theological understandings of the human person. It begins by exploring the Hebrew scriptures and ancient Greek philosophy in relation to the nature of the soul, the importance of the body and gender. Of central importance is a theological anthropology focused on the imago dei. The module will progress to the study of Christ as the true human and the mediaeval concept of the human person as a microcosm of the cosmos. The latter stages of the module will focus on theological anthropology in the context of modern philosophical anthropologies, modernity's focus on 'mind' and 'consciousness' in the understanding of the human person, and contemporary ethical issues surrounding human 'enhancement' via medical technologies. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     The Nature of Meaning 
    
    
     The module begins with an exploration of various theories of naming, paying particular attention to the works of Frege, Russell, and Kripke. We then turn our attention to various puzzles concerning the nature of meaning, including the distinction between analytic and synthetic sentences. In the final part of the module, we move on to a discussion of some of the mainstream theories of meaning; particularly, a truth-conditional semantics, and we explore how this might be developed to take into account indexical terms such as `I', `now', and `here'. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Love and Death 
    
    
     In this module you’ll engage in a philosophical exploration of the diversity of ways that love and death have been understood in the Western tradition and have been used to give meaning and significance to human life. Starting with the foundations of Plato’s Phaedrus and Apology you will explore issues such as: how morality makes moral action meaningful, whether dying for others is a model of love, whether erotic love and charity are essentially different, and whether human aspiration is driven by anticipation or fear of death. You will encounter elements of Christian theology, philosophy, psychoanalysis and existentialism in the module. You’ll have a combination of two hours of lectures and a one hour seminar each week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Freedom and Obligation 
    
    
     This module combines consideration of the political philosophy of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and J.S. Mill with related themes in contemporary debates. The module is designed to introduce you to each of the thinkers and then to consider how related issues are treated by contemporary writers. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar.  
    
   
       
    
    
    Virtue Ethics and Literature 
    
    
     In this module you’ll be introduced to virtue ethics as an ancient form of moral practice, which has come back into prominence in recent years. Virtue ethics emphasises the lived experience of a tradition and is therefore narrative in character, offering itself naturally to literary embodiment. You’ll study key ancient Greek texts of the virtue tradition including Aristotle's Nichomachaen Ethics as well as works by Theophrastus, Cicero, Aquinas and contemporary reconstruals of the virtue tradition by Alasdair MacIntyre and Stanley Hauerwas. Virtue ethics will then be analysed in literary texts, such as Homer's Iliad, the medieval poem, Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Jane Austen's Mansfield Park and Graham Green's Brighton Rock. You’ll have a one hour lecture as well as two hours of seminars every week for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Knowledge and Justification 
    
    
     This module explores contemporary treatments of issues pertaining to knowledge and the justification of belief. It addresses issues such as the following: the structure of justification and its relation to one's mental states and evidence; the justification of induction; the notion of a priori justification and the relation between your evidence and what you know, among others. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Money, Sex and Power: Religion and Critical Theory 
    
    
     This module explore the central questions such as ‘What is religion for?,’ ‘What interests does it serve?,’ and ‘Whether or not religion is 'true', may it be suspected of producing an illusory view of itself?’ You will be introduced to and explore three critical worldviews and their critiques of established religion: psychoanalysis (religion as wish-fulfilment); Marxian critical theory (religion as ideology); and Nietzschean scepticism (religion as will to power). You will examine the view of modern critical theories of religion that it is the drive of money, sex and power which govern the shape of life, and provide a framework for understanding all experience, including pre-eminently that of religion. You’ll have a two hour lecture each week for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Typical Year Three Modules   
   
   
    In year three you will have the flexibility to focus on either philosophy or theology and religious studies, or give equal weighting to both. Writing a dissertation is optional. Optional modules offered include:  
    Optional  
   
     Darwinism 
    
    
     What is Darwinism? Is it metaphysics, a philosophy, or ‘merely’ science. Does it entail atheism? Could it even accommodate theism? This module will explore Darwin’s theory of evolution, outlining its historical development up to the present day and considering the various debates that shaped its formation. You’ll explore the theory’s application in terms of Social-Darwinism, Sociobiology, and Evolutionary Psychology and the consequences this might have for our own self-understanding, and for how we interpret the world. The module is taught by Conor Cunningham, whose recent book Darwin’s Pious Idea and BBC documentary on the topic have ignited much debate. You’ll have two hours of lectures and an one hour seminar each week for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Justice 
    
    
     In this module you’ll be introduced to the history of the main philosophical and theological theories of justice, up to the present day. You’ll focus on a critical assessment of the truth and viability of these theories and the way in which the theme of justice forms a crucial intersection between ethical and political philosophy. You’ll have three hours of seminars each week for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Issues of Indeterminism  
    
    
     This module explores the significance of indeterminism for such matters as counterfactual dependence and our sense that the future is open, causation, explanation, law and chance. It is grounded in seminal papers by one of the 20th century's greatest philosophers—namely, David Lewis. In these papers Lewis tries to show that counterfactual dependence, causation, explanation, law and chance all conform to the fundamental doctrine he calls 'Humean' supervenience. You’ll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     The Spirit of Utopia: Critical Theory, Politics and Religion 
    
    
     In this module you’ll trace the development of Critical Theory from its beginnings in the original Frankfurt School, through its American offspring and its German continuation (Habermas, Honneth, Sloterdijk), up to its influence on French deconstruction (Derrida). The name of the module derives from the early work of Ernst Bloch, The Spirit of Utopia, which for the first time fused Marxist and Freudian ‘theories of suspicion’ with the Messianic idiom. You will explore the way that Critical Theory, far from being ‘atheistic,’ is, in fact, deeply influenced by a certain form of religious narrative deriving mostly from the sources of Jewish Messianism. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Environmental Ethics 
    
    
     Environmental ethics addresses the issue of how human beings should interact with the non-human natural world. This module will cover a range of topics from contemporary philosophical literature on environmental ethics. You’ll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.  
    
   
       
    
    
    Religion of Fantasy 
    
    
     This module offers an investigation into the rise of the fantasy genre at the precise point at which religion in the western world was challenged by the rise of rationalism, materialism and historical criticism. You’ll analyse a range of literary fantasies and fantastic tales as apologies, theodicies or critiques that seek to address these challenges. Authors studied include George MacDonald, G. K. Chesterton, Charles Williams, J.R.R. Tolkien's and C.S. Lewis. You’ll have three hours of seminars each week for this module.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Philosophy of Art 
    
    
     This module aims to promote a deeper understanding of philosophical issues pertaining to art. By the end of the module, you should be able to discuss and evaluate different views of the expressive power of art, to explain certain current view on expression and representation, and to present the main contemporary viewpoints pertaining to the nature of artworks. You’ll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.  
    
   
       
    
    
    Marx 
    
    
     In this module you’ll be introduced to the theories of Karl Marx through selected texts from his works. Topics covers will include: alienation, the material conception of history, the labour theory of value and French political theory among others. You’ll gain an understanding of concepts essential for advanced study on this course. For this module you’ll have a one 2-hour lecture and a one 1-hour seminar each week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Sex, Violence and God: Ethics in the Hebrew Bible 
    
    
     This module will examine a range of ethical issues in the Hebrew Bible, considering the nature of ethical thought in ancient Israel and its relationship to surrounding ideas in the Ancient Near East, as well as the ongoing use of these texts as a moral resource right up to the present day. Topics for specific study include those such as the justification of violence and warfare, sexuality and gender issues, and ideas of social justice. The module is taught through a two hour seminar each week.  
    
   
       
    
   
     Jewish Philosophy and Theology: From Philo to Levinas 
    
    
     The module will provide an overview of the most important theological and philosophical ideas, theories and arguments that Jewish thought developed from the Hellenistic period of Philo of Alexandria to the postmodern times of Emmanuel Levinas. The method of instruction will combine historical and speculative approaches, using the perspective of the 'history of ideas'. The module reflects the way that Jewish thought has not developed in isolation, but in intense dialogue with the surrounding Christian, Muslim and secular cultures throughout the ages. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.