Modules  
  Your modules will depend on the language combination that you choose from the table under the ‘Overview’ tab. Post-A level languages offered for this degree are French, German, Portuguese, Russian, and Spanish. Beginners’ languages offered are French, German, Portuguese, Russian, Serbian/Croatian, and Spanish.  
  Language modules   
  You will take language modules at the appropriate level. Post-A level language instruction builds on your existing skills and develops your competence in reading, writing, speaking and listening. If you are a beginner, you will take an intensive course that is structured to take you from beginners’ or GCSE level to degree level in four years. You will take the same language modules as post-A level students in the final year of the course, and will graduate with the same degree.  
  Optional modules   
  
   
  
 
   For details of your core language modules, please see the relevant web page for the single honours course of that language: 
  
 
     
  
  
   French, German, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish  
  
  
   Beginners take fewer optional modules in the first two years of their beginners’ language programme, so that they can concentrate on intensive language acquisition.  
  
  
   
    Typical Year One Optional Modules  
   
   
    
     Introduction to German Studies: Unity and Diversity in German Identities  
    
    
     This year-long module provides an introduction to the study of German and is compulsory for most students of German. It covers the main fields of German Studies: literature, culture, history, linguistics, media and film. You will be introduced to the study skills required for academic study: critical and analytic skills, reading skills, presentation skills and writing skills. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Introduction to French and Francophone Studies  
    
    
     You will receive a firm grounding in the structures of French through the core language module. You will also follow a core module 'Introduction to French and Francophone Studies' which will prepare you for studying the range of topics and skills you will develop in your degree course. You will also take additional modules in French literature and the history and politics of contemporary France.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Nation, Myth, Identity: Introduction to Russian and Slavonic Studies  
    
    
     This module introduces students to important areas and topics in Russian and Slavonic Studies, examining important aspects of the histories and cultures of the region, as well as aspects of the languages, cultures and literary traditions. You will learn to analyse a wide range of cultural phenomena, including pictures, music, film, literary texts and other kinds of written sources.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Introduction to Literature in Spanish  
    
    
     You’ll read a series of key texts from Spain and Spanish America. Its purpose is to impart an essential body of literary-historical and cultural knowledge relating to the main periods, genres and conventions of literature in Spanish from the Middle Ages to the modern period. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Introduction to Lusophone Societies and Cultures  
    
   
     The Portuguese speaking-world is made up of people on four different continents: Europe, Africa, Asia and the Americas, and there are eight countries in which Portuguese remains the official language. The spread of the language is a representation of the reach of the Portuguese Empire at its height as well as a reflection of the legacy of Lusophone cultures. This module provides you with the opportunity to learn about the diversity of cultural practices and social relations in the different parts of the world where Portuguese is spoken. The module covers the major social and cultural practices from modern Lusophone societies, including aspects of popular culture such as football and soap operas, but also cultural and artistic currents in literature and film. Questions of social relations and identity are also examined through a consideration of religious practice and religious expression, as well as themes of conflict, crisis and revolution through formations of political identity and political mobilisation. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.    
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
    Typical Year Two Optional Modules  
   
   
    
     Reason and its Rivals from Kant to Freud  
    
    
     This module discusses a selection of theoretical approaches to modernity. You will start by studying Immanuel Kant’s assertion of individual reason as the founding stone of enlightened social organisation. You will then explore interrogations of that position in the work of Marx and Engels, Nietzsche and Freud. You will have one 2-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Discoveries, Empires and Colonies in the Lusophone World  
    
    
     This module brings together the histories and cultures of key regions of the world in which Portugal establishes varying degrees of colonial rule between the 16th and 20th centuries. In this module you will examine the historical background to the age of Discoveries against which Portugal emerged as a leader in maritime exploration and European Imperialism. You will also examine the historical and political events of Portuguese colonialism and imperialism in Africa and Brazil, with an emphasis on understanding the political and social significance of cultural production in developing countries. In this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars totalling two hours per week.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Hispanic Visual Culture  
    
    
     In this module you will be given and general introduction to cinema and painting in the Hispanic and Lusophone worlds. In the first semester you will be introduced to painting in Spain, Portugal, and Latin America from the late 15th century to the early 19th century with an emphasis on how to analyse paintings and understand the styles and contexts from which paintings emerge. In the 2nd semester you will examine contemporary cinema from Spain and Latin America addressing questions of style, socio-historical context and narrative context. In this module you will have a one 2-hour class per week.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Caribbean Francophone Writing  
    
    
     In this introduction to literature in French from the Caribbean, you’ll study texts by authors from Martinique and Guadeloupe, and will combine discussion of the contexts with critical analyses of the texts themselves. You’ll spend around 2 hours per week in lectures and seminars if you study this module.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Linguistic Variation in France   
    
    
     You’ll explore the different kinds of linguistic variation in France including those across time periods, geographical variation, social groups, class, and disparity between oral and written forms. You’ll also be introduced to the history of the French language and its recent developments, spending around 2 hours per week in lectures and seminars.   
    
   
       
    
    
     Introduction to Literary Translation (German)  
    
    
     This module explores theoretical approaches and practical problems in literary translation of the same texts and themselves compose a translation of a text of their choice. During this module you’ll have 2 hours of lectures/seminars weekly.   
    
   
       
    
    
     The Russian Novel  
    
    
     This module offers an in-depth analysis of world classics of the novel genre - from nineteenth-century pioneers of realism such as Pushkin and Gogol, through the masterpieces of Dostoevsky and Tolstoy, to the revolutionary advances of Russian prose fiction in the twentieth century.    
    
   
       
    
    
     The World of Orthodox Sainthood  
    
    
     You’ll gain an understanding of the growth and development of the cult of saints in the Eastern Christian world in the context of the history and culture of late antiquity and the middle ages. In particular, you’ll learn to interpret original written sources and icons and will master the basic tools for conducting research in the field, spending around three hours in lectures and seminars each week.   
     
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
    Typical Year Four Optional Modules   
   
   
    
     Citizenship, Ethnicity and National Identity in Post-War France  
    
    
     You’ll examine the range of social, political and philosophical questions raised by mass immigration to France in the post-war period. These questions will be tackled through historical analysis of patterns of migration and changing immigration policies, as well as through the study of relevant films, novels and theoretical texts. You’ll spend 2 hours each week in lectures and seminars studying this module.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Myths and Memories: Histories of Russia's Second World War  
    
    
     This module introduces you to the construction of national and collective memory of the Second World War in Soviet and Russian culture and society. You’ll focus on contemporary and subsequent artistic and social responses to the experience of war, but also look at individual acts of remembering (diaries, reports, letters) in the context of a wider cultural memory. The module is conducted in English and you’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Serbian and Croatian Cinema  
    
    
     Developing your ability in addressing the study of cinema, this module examines the ways in which themes, motifs and narrative structures of films combine to produce semantically complex interfaces through which they also reflect the cultural circumstances of their production. In an average week you’ll spend around six hours in lectures, seminars and film viewings.   
    
   
       
    
    
     Culture and Society in the Weimar Republic  
    
    
     The Weimar Republic (1919-1933) was one of the most fascinating and The Weimar Republic (1919-1933) was one of the most fascinating and culturally productive periods of German history, but it was equally plagued by crises and violent conflicts. This module aims to introduce central issues in the literary and social developments of Weimar Germany. You will study a wide range of materials (literary texts, film, aesthetic and political programmes) to analyse key features of the period. Topics will include the impact of the Great War, developments in the press and the cinema, political confrontations, cabaret, and unemployment. You will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar per week in addition to extensive independent study.  
    
   
       
    
    
     The Language of Social Media   
    
    
     Language is constantly changing and nowhere more so than on social media, where users constantly adapt their language to achieve their communicative goals and to overcome the lack of face-to-face contact with their communication partners. In this module we explore the ways in which the German language is used on various kinds of social media, and how this often differs from standard German. We study the state-of-the-art linguistic research into online communication and non-standard language use. At the same time, students carry out their own research, collecting and analysing data from various social media sources: because of the ever-evolving nature of online language use, this often involves investigating phenomena that are so new, they haven't been properly studied yet! On this module you have three hours of teaching per week alongside extensive private study (which doesn't just involve reading, but also data collecting and analysis): we spend one hour in a computer room collecting data to test a particular hypothesis followed by an hour in which we analyse the data; a third hour, later in the week, is spent learning about and discussing theories of online language use. There is a strong focus on small group work in the module: the in-class research and analysis are done in groups of three to five students, and then presented to the whole class.    
    
   
       
    
    
     The Radicalisation of Nationalism in Modern Latin America: Cuban Revolution in Continental Perspective  
    
    
     This module is concerned with the emergence, nature and evolution of the Cuban Revolution. You will consider the Revolution in question within a wider historical and ideological context: the Latin American tradition of an increasingly radical nationalism. Dating from the 19th and early 20th century this is a time when there was a need to engage in serious and collective nation-building. The module therefore examines how the Cuban Revolution went on to influence the subsequent radicalisation of that tradition, shaping a range of political manifestation. For this module you will have a one 2-hour class each week.  
    
   
       
    
    
     Spanish American Narrative  
    
    
     You’ll explore the work of key writers in 20th century Spanish America, all of whom bear the recognisable imprint of literary Modernism. You will closely study two writers of what has become known as the ‘Boom’(namely, Gabriel Garc&iacute;a M&aacute;rquez and Julio Cort&aacute;zar); and three precursors of that generation (Jorge Luis Borges, Alejo Carpentier and Juan Rulfo). The module will examine the ways in which they make use of myth, the fantastic and experimental narrative techniques to write about history, traditional, popular and/or mass culture, gender and sexuality. You will have a one 2-hour class each week.