Modules  
  
   Typical Year One Modules
   
  
  
      
   Compulsory   
  
    Russian 1 
   
  
    You’ll consolidate and develop your knowledge of Russian which you have gained at A level. This module focuses on practical application of your language skills, including reading, writing, comprehension and oral communication. You will also study some grammar topics in depth. You’ll spend six hours per week in practical classes workshops and tutorials, benefiting from experienced teachers, most of whom are native speakers, and the use of excellent language laboratory facilities.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Nation, Myth, Identity: Introduction to Russian and Slavonic Studies  
   
  
    This module introduces students to important areas and topics in Russian and Slavonic Studies, examining important aspects of the histories and cultures of the region, as well as aspects of the languages, cultures and literary traditions. You will learn to analyse a wide range of cultural phenomena, including pictures, music, film, literary texts and other kinds of written sources.
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Mandarin Chinese for Beginners 1A 
   
  
    This module provides you with the knowledge of Chinese phonetics, grammar, vocabulary and cultural information in order to develop your competence in Mandarin Chinese. The focus is on communicative competence in both spoken and written language.
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Mandarin Chinese for Beginners 1B 
   
  
    This module builds on the knowledge you acquired in semester 1, introducing post-elementary grammatical structures and phonology of Mandarin Chinese. You will learn to write notes, simple letters and a diary, as well as to use more diverse basic vocabulary for social and everyday situations and more sophisticated language skills.
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Introduction to Contemporary China 
   
   
    This is an introductory course designed to provide students with an overview of contemporary China and help students establish a foundation of knowledge and skills to pursue more advanced studies of China in their later years of study. You will examine a variety of topics such as Chinese economy and politics, security and foreign relations, and Chinese media since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949 with particular attention paid to the changes in China since 1978. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional   
   
   Introduction to Business and Economy of China 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the economy, business, institutions and economically-related political aspects of contemporary China with a focus on the reform period. You’ll gain an overview of macro- and micro- economic, institutional and political factors that affect business and development in China, as well as major economic sectors in China. Issues covered include: economic development, economic reform, exports and FDI, the financial and banking system, state and non-state firms, technology, major challenges including income inequalities, and the state’s role in the growth and management of the economy. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture and a one 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Introduction to the Chinese legal system 
   
   
    Studying this module you will gain an introduction to the origin, key elements and characteristics of the evolving Chinese legal system including the history of Chinese law, the organization of the People’s Republic of China as a state and its constitutional laws, the law making process in China, the legal institutions and the Chinese court system, the criminal process, and the civil process and legal profession in China. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
     
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
      
   Compulsory  
   
   Russian 2 
   
   
    This module will help you to develop your comprehension of Russian and your communicative skills, including reading, oral fluency in Russian, and translation from Russian into English. The module also includes some writing in Russian and study of more sophisticated grammar topics. You’ll spend three hours per week in practical classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Russian in Practice 
   
   
    Through three hours of practical classes and lectures you are given the opportunity to develop your practical language skills. You’ll be given exercises in translation, comprehension and composition and also work on your spoken Russian in oral classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Mandarin Chinese for the Intermediate Level (2A) 
   
   
    This module will consolidates the skills you have acquired in Year One and aims to further develop your oral and written communicative ability in the Mandarin Chinese language in more complex situations. You will have three hours per week of lectures and practical classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Mandarin Chinese for the Intermediate Level (2B) 
   
   
    This module aims further develops your knowledge of Mandarin in increasingly complex situations, focusing on oral and written communication. You will have three hours per week of lectures and practical classes.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
   
   Screening Russia: Film and Society from the Tsars to Putin 
   
   
    In this module you will acquire an in-depth understanding of developments in Russian society and culture as reflected in popular and influential films from the period 1900 to 2010. You’ll examine how films are constructed technically and develop skills in analysing cinema in its historical and social contexts. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Repression and Resistance: Dissidents and Exiles in Russian Culture 
   
   
    This module provides you with an introduction to the themes of dissidence and exile, central notions in Russian literature, culture and thinking, using the examples of the life and work of four major Russian writers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (Pushkin, Dostoevsky, Nabokov, Bulgakov). You will learn the theory of different literary forms (verse narrative, novel, short story and drama).  
   
  
      
   
   
   Medieval Russia: Rus and Muscovy, c. 900-1700 
   
   
    This module introduces the medieval period in the history of the East Slavs, covering pre-Christian times to the rise of the Romanov dynasty. You will focus on both political and cultural developments and learn to assess primary sources in various media (texts, painting, architecture) for seminar discussions and essays.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Serbian and Croatian Literature  
   
  
    You’ll examine major literary movements in Serbia and Croatia during the 20th century, from Modernism to the socially engaged literature of the 1930s, Socialist Realism, literary politics under the Communists in Yugoslavia and the emergence of critical literature in the 1980s and 1990s. You’ll also undertake a textual analysis of representative works from 20th century literature; for example, works by Milos Crnjanski, Ivo Andrić, Miroslav Krleža, Danilo Kiš and Slobodan Selenić. You’ll spend around two hours per week studying in lectures and seminars. 
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Yugoslavia and Successor States since 1941 
   
  
    The aim of this module is to examine developments in the political, social and diplomatic history of Yugoslavia after 1941 leading towards an understanding of the reasons behind the collapse of the country and subsequent violence in the 1990s. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
   
  
      
   
   
   The Rise of Modern China 
   
  
    In this module you will study the history of China from the 1840s, through to the establishment of the People’s Republic in 1949. You will focus in particular on the ways in which Chinese society responded to the arrival of ‘modernity’ in the form of the Western powers and Japan throughout the period in question, but also how different groups in China tried to remould or redefine China as a ‘modern’ nation-state and society. In this module you will have a two-hour lecture each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Management Strategy 
   
  
    In this module you will be given a theoretical and applied overview of strategic management in today's operational environment. It introduces and analyses the key concepts, frameworks and techniques of strategic management, which allow them to diagnose complex situations related to real-world business development. For this module you will have a one 1-hour and a half lecture and a one 1-hour and a half seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
   International Political Economy 
   
   
    The study of International Political Economy is essentially interdisciplinary, based on the premise that the political and economic domains are inextricably intertwined in the international system. You will learn the main approaches to International Political Economy, related to a conceptual as well as empirical engagement with the history of, and recent changes in, areas such as international trade, global finance, transnational production and development related to the North-South problematic. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture and a one 1-hour seminar each week.  
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Chinese Business Law 
   
   
    This module aims to provide an overview of the development of Chinese business law in the context of economic globalization and in particular of China's WTO membership. The module mainly include: Political Economy of Business Regulation in China and China's WTO Membership; Introduction to the Chinese's Legal System and Law Making Process; Chinese Contract Law, Law on Business Organizations, Company Law and Corporate Governance in China, Chinese Antimonopoly Law and Intellectual Property Laws. It concludes with discussions on the possible impacts of China's integration into the economic globalization on its domestic business regulation. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.  
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Social Change and Public Policy in China's Reform Era 
   
   
    In this module you will learn how the Chinese central government has responded to socio-economic changes by issuing a number of key policy initiatives, most notably in the field of social security, health, education, labour, innovation and the environment. In the first part of the module participants will be sensitized about the interplay between socio-economic transformation, administrative reform and public policy making during China's reform era (1978).  
    In the second part of the module students will learn about the expanded spaces for participatory policy making in China by analysing case studies in all five substantive policy fields. As part of their course assignments students will be asked to write one 3,000 word essay and put insights into practice by developing group presentations on a selected public policy. This optional module will provide a socially relevant policy curriculum and help students develop necessary skills for a democratic practice of policy inquiry. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Students also have the option of beginning study of Serbian/Croatian or Slovene.  
  
 
     
  
     
  
  Year Three: You will spend this year abroad, with your time divided between Russia and China. Though you will concentrate on studying the languages, there will be opportunities to take up teaching or volunteer work. In Russia, you have the opportunity of benefiting from the Department of Russian and Slavonic Studies’ links with Russian universities and language schools, and tuition fees for all approved courses of study are covered by the Department. You may also opt to take up an approved work placement. See the Department of Russian and Slavonic Studies' 
  Study Abroad page for further information. For information regarding studying at the University of Nottingham’s campus in Ningbo, China, 
   click here.   
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical Year Four Modules 
  
  
      
   Compulsory  
  
    Russian 3 
   
  
    Through this module you’ll develop a high level of Russian language skills, both written and spoken. The written skills include English-Russian and Russian-English translation, production of summaries and creative writing in Russian. Oral presentations draw upon and extend the practical language experience of your year abroad. You’ll also cover advanced grammar topics of Russian. You will spend three hours per week in practical classes and workshops.
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Mandarin Chinese for the Advanced Level 
   
   
    The final year Mandarin Chinese course will develop your communicative competence in Mandarin Chinese in both spoken and written language to a high level. Following on from your work during your time abroad, you will further improve your ability to employ your language skills in everyday formal and informal situations and across a broad range of contemporary applications.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional  
  
    Russian Language in the 20th Century  
   
  
    You’ll focus on the development of the Russian language during the 20th century in relation to the changing socio-political climate of the period. This modules looks at language as a social and ideologically-charged product and topics covered include the Soviet language and national policies, social stratification of languages, Marxist linguistics, linguistic purism in the Soviet and post-Soviet period, globalisation and post-Soviet Russian language identity. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Russian Popular Music in the 20th and 21st Centuries 
   
  
    The module offers an in-depth study of the development of popular music in Russia in the 20th and 21st centuries. You will gain knowledge of the popular musical culture of the late Tsarist, Soviet and post-Soviet eras, and learn to analyse songs and performances using such concepts as authorship, performance, technology and ideology. You will have one lecture and one two-hour seminar per week on this module.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Petersburg Text 
   
  
    Through three hours of lectures and seminars each week, you’ll undertake an in-depth analysis of the Russian imperial capital, St Petersburg and its artistic representations. You will study the development of the image of St Petersburg in Russian poetry (Pushkin, Blok, Akhmatova, Mandelshtam) and prose (Gogol, Dostoevsky, Bely, Bitov) of both the 19th and 20th centuries. You’ll also be given a historical overview of the evolution of the legend of St Petersburg, its representations in folklore, and readings of its urban landscape.
    
   
  
      
   
   
   History of the Byzantine History Empire, c. 300-1453 
   
   
    This module offers advanced study of the history of the Byzantine Empire from the reign of Constantine I to the fall of Constantinople. The course is structured chronologically, focusing on particular themes for each period: religion and heresy in late antiquity; warfare and the arts in middle Byzantium; and politics and international relations in late Byzantium. In an average week you’ll spend around three hours in lectures and seminars on this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
   East European and Balkan Cultural Studies 
   
   
    The module examines issues covering the division of Europe into East and West, the West’s construction of Russian, East European and Balkan identities in its own imagination, relations between dominant and subordinate cultures in Europe, and theoretical frameworks in which to examine intercultural relations (semiotics, orientalism). You will examine examples of such constructions in travelogues, popular fiction, film and journalism. The module also includes study of the influence of such largely negative views on identity formation within Eastern Europe and the Balkans.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Myths and Memories: Histories of Russia's Second World War 
   
  
    This module introduces you to the construction of national and collective memory of the Second World War in Soviet and Russian culture and society. You’ll focus on contemporary and subsequent artistic and social responses to the experience of war, but also look at individual acts of remembering (diaries, reports, letters) in the context of a wider cultural memory. The module is conducted in English and you’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Serbian/Croatian for Linguists  
   
  
    This module is a fast-track course of study for students in their final year who wish to acquire a new language. The module is based on the textbook Teach Yourself Serbian and will introduce you to everyday use of the language. Through three hours of practical classes each week, you’ll study different points of grammar (syntax and morphology) as well as vocabulary for everyday situations. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Slovene for Linguists 
   
  
    The module covers a basic knowledge of the Slovene language along with the first fundamentals of Slovene grammar. It develops aural comprehension and oral communication based on information acquired, and enables students to translate simple texts from and into Slovene. The module is taught by a native speaker and is based on a textbook, supported by additional materials. 
   
  
      
   
   
   Mao's China 
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn China under the communist party in the pre-reform era of 1949-1978. You’ll examine how China was organized and governed, changes in rural and urban society, the family, the economy and the Chinese workplace under Mao Zedong's CCP. You’ll have an hour a week of both lecture and seminar learning during this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
   China Through Film and Literature 
   
   
    In this module you will first examine the close linkage between literature and cinema in China and the consequences and then explore trends in modern Chinese literature and cinema, with a primary focus on different genres and themes developed since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949. By placing Chinese literature and film within their cultural, social and historical contexts, you will analyse, interpret and appreciate such phenomena. You will analyse individual texts in translation and films with English subtitles to increase your awareness of the major developments in literature and film as they are embedded in the wider changes in contemporary China. You will have one 3-hour practical class each week studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Media and Communications in Globalising China 
   
   
    Media systems are critically important in any modern political system, and this module leads you directly to the heart of understanding how the media relates to contemporary society and politics in the People’s Republic of China. It introduces you to the unprecedented transformation in contemporary Chinese media and communication in the context of economic reforms, development of new media technologies and globalisation through a two hour weekly lecture.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Chinese Business and Society 
   
   
    In this module you will be introduced to the economic, social, cultural and institutional settings in which businesses operate in China. Possible topics to be covered include: Chinese firms and business groups and internationalization, management business culture, management and business practice, and consumption and regional development. Students will also apply this knowledge to the analysis of business opportunities and risks in contemporary China. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
   
   China's Political Economy 
   
   
    This module examines the interaction between politics and economy in China during the economic reform period from 1978 onward. Particular attention will be given to the progress and periods of China’s reform, the political context of major economic policies, reform of major aspects of the economy, evolution of economic institutions, as well as an overview of economic development in China prior to 1978. The module will highlight the role of the political factors and state policies in China’s economy, which is important for a good understanding of the reform and economic development in China. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Government and Politics of Taiwan and Hong Kong: Alternatives to Leninism 
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn about the two countries that choose a different pathway from mainland China whilst still under the leadership of the communist party. You’ll address a number of questions in order to gain a good understanding of the processes of these unique countries and be able to critically reflect on their differences with mainland China. You’ll have two hours of lectures weekly studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Globalization and Innovation in China 
   
   
    This module is designed to analyse and assess the momentous changes taking place in China’s technology and innovation landscape from the perspective of globalization. After identifying the impacts of globalization on innovation in China, the module will concentrate on the vast transformations that have occurred since 1978 in China’s national innovation system. Special attention will be given to the dynamics of innovation in a changing China where new technologies have emerged and new business models developed and to the key issues for China as well as its international partners to succeed in what continues to be the fastest growing, most dynamic market in the world. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week.