Modules  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory 
   
   
   Russian 1 - Beginners (a) 
   
   
   
     This intensive module provides you with the opportunity to learn Russian to approximately GCSE level as a basis for study to honours degree level. You’ll study grammar and syntax, acquire vocabulary, read simple texts, and engage in simple conversations on personal subjects. In an average week you’ll spend around two hours in lectures, an hour in practical classes and three hours in workshops. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Russian 1 - Beginners (b) 
   
   
   
     This module continues development of your Russian language skills begun in the previous module Russian 1 - Beginners (a). You’ll spend two hours in lectures, an hour in practical classes and three hours in workshops during a typical week and acquire Russian language skills equivalent to A level standard by the end of the semester. 
    
   
       
    
   
  
      
   
      
   or  
   
   Nation, Myth, Identity: Introduction to Russian and Slavonic Studies 
   
   
    This module introduces students to important areas and topics in Russian and Slavonic Studies, examining important aspects of the histories and cultures of the region, as well as aspects of the languages, cultures and literary traditions. You will learn to analyse a wide range of cultural phenomena, including pictures, music, film, literary texts and other kinds of written sources.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Learning History 
   
   
   
     This module will provide you with the learning skills necessary to make the most of your studies in history. You will be introduced to different approaches in the study of history as well as to different understandings of what history is for. The module aims to encourage more effective learning, bridge the transition from school or college to university, prepare you for more advanced work in the discipline, and enhance the skills listed. You will spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   Optional  
  
    Introduction to the Medieval World, 500-1500 
   
   
    This module provides an introduction to medieval European history in the period 500–1500. It offers a fresh and stimulating approach to the major forces instrumental in the shaping of politics, society and culture in Europe. Through a series of thematically linked lectures and seminars, you will be introduced to key factors determining changes in the European experience over time, as well as important continuities linking the period as a whole. Amongst the topics to be considered are: political structures and organization; social and economic life and cultural developments. You will have a one hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    From Reformation to Revolution: an introduction to early modern history, 1500-1789 
   
   
   
     This module introduces you to major issues in the social, political and cultural history of Europe in the early modern period by analysing demographic, religious, social and cultural changes that took place between 1500 and 1789. You’ll examine the tensions produced by warfare, religious conflict, the changing relationships between rulers, subjects and political elites, trends in socio-economic development and the discovery of the ‘New World’ spending two hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Roads to Modernity: an introduction to modern history, 1789-1945 
   
   
   
     In the first semester the module provides a chronology of modern history from c.1789-1945 which concentrates principally on key political developments in European and global history such as the French Revolution, the expansion of the European empires and the two World Wars. The second semester will look more broadly at economic, social and cultural issues, such as industrialisation, urbanisation, changing artistic forms and ideological transformations in order to consider the nature of modernity. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  Compulsory 
   
  
    Russian 2 
   
   
   
     You’ll consolidate and develop your knowledge of Russian which you have gained so far. This module focuses on practical application of your language skills, including reading, writing, comprehension and oral communication. You will also study some grammar topics in depth. You’ll spend six hours per week in practical classes, workshops and tutorials, benefiting from experienced teachers, most of whom are native speakers, and the use of excellent language laboratory facilities.
     
    
   
  
      
   
      
   or  
  
    Russian Comprehension and Oral 
   
  
    This module will help you to develop your comprehension of Russian and your communicative skills, including reading, oral fluency in Russian, and translation from Russian into English. The module also includes some writing in Russian and study of more sophisticated grammar topics. You’ll spend three hours per week in practical classes and lectures. 
   
  
      
   
      
  
    Russian in Practice 
   
   
    Through three hours of practical classes and lectures you are given the opportunity to develop your practical language skills further. You’ll be given exercises in translation, comprehension and composition and also work on your spoken Russian in oral classes.  
    
   
  
      
   
   Optional   
   
   Medieval Russia: Rus and Muscovy, c. 900-1700 
   
   
    
     This module introduces the medieval period in the history of the East Slavs, covering pre-Christian times to the rise of the Romanov dynasty. You will focus on both political and cultural developments and learn to assess primary sources in various media (texts, painting, architecture) for seminar discussions and essays.  
    
   
  
      
   
      
  
    The Russian Novel  
   
  
    This is hidden 
   
  
      
   
      
  
    Repression and Resistance: Dissidents and Exiles in Russian Culture 
   
  
    This is hidden 
   
  
      
   
      
  
    Russian Linguistics: Topics, Tips and Tools  
   
  
    This is hidden 
   
  
      
   
  
    Serbian and Croatian Literature 
   
  
    You’ll examine major literary movements in Serbia and Croatia during the 20th century, from Modernism to the socially engaged literature of the 1930s, Socialist Realism, literary politics under the Communists in Yugoslavia and the emergence of critical literature in the 1980s and 1990s. You’ll also undertake a textual analysis of representative works from 20th century literature; for example, works by Milos Crnjanski, Ivo Andrić, Miroslav Krleža, Danilo Kiš and Slobodan Selenić. You’ll spend around two hours per week studying in lectures and seminars.
    
   
  
      
   
   
   The History of Yugoslavia and Successor States since 1941 
   
   
    The aim of this module is to examine developments in the political, social and diplomatic history of Yugoslavia after 1941 leading towards an understanding of the reasons behind the collapse of the country and subsequent violence in the 1990s. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Screening Russia: Film and Society from the Tsars to Putin 
   
   
   
     In this module you will acquire an in-depth understanding of developments in Russian society and culture as reflected in popular and influential films from the period 1900 to 2010. You’ll examine how films are constructed technically and develop skills in analysing cinema in its historical and social contexts. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Crusades 
   
   
   
     This module addresses evidence for crusader motivation and experience through sources relating to crusading activity in Europe and the Middle East from the late eleventh century to the mid-13th century. It seeks to understand how crusaders saw themselves and their enemies, their experiences and activity on crusade and as settlers, and how this horrifying yet enduringly fascinating process has been interpreted historically. You’ll have five hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    De-industrialisation: A Social and Cultural History, 1970-1990 
   
   
   
     This module examines the social and cultural impact of economic change in three traditional industrial regions in the UK, Germany and the US in the 1970s and 1980s. It takes thematic approaches, exploring topics including: overlaps and differences between Contemporary History and the Social Sciences; change and decline in traditional industries such as coal, steel and shipbuilding; political responses to industrial change, with a particular focus on industrial conflict over closures, among others. You’ll spend four hours per week in lecture and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Soviet State and Society 
   
   
   
     This module examines political, social and economic transformations in the Soviet Union from the October Revolution of 1917 to Gorbachev’s attempted reforms and the collapse of the state in 1991. You’ll look at Russia both from the top down (state-building strategies; leadership and regime change, economic and social policy formulation and implementation) and from the bottom up (societal developments and the changing structures and practices of everyday life). You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
     Race, Rights and Propaganda: the superpowers, the Cold War, and the politics of racial identity, 1945-89 
    
   
   
   
     The Cold War was a conflict defined as much by intellectual and cultural struggle as by conventional military means, diplomacy, or realpolitik. Conceptions of race and identity were by no means immune from this, but heavily disputed and contested in the political environment of the Cold War. This module examines how the two superpowers dealt with issues of race and identity during the Cold War years, confronting questions and challenges from both within their own borders (and each other’s) and in several theatres of superpower conflict – including the Middle East, East Asia and post-colonial Africa. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.
     
    
   
  
      
   
      
   All students also have the option of beginning a second Slavonic language (Serbian/Croatian or Slovene)  
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  
    In your third year of study you will spend the academic year abroad in Russia. You will be supported by our Year Abroad team in preparation for this period in Year Two. You have the option to study at one of our partner universities in Russia or at a language school. It is also possible to combine study with working. If you are taking a second Slavonic language, you will be able to divide your time to cover the countries of both languages. 
   
  
      
   
  
    For more information, please see the Department of Russian and Slavonic Studies Year Abroad 
   webpage.
    
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules   
  
  
      
   Compulsory  
  
    Russian 3 
   
   
   
     Through this module you’ll develop a high level of Russian language skills, both written and oral. The written skills include English-Russian and Russian-English translation, production of summaries and creative writing in Russian. Oral presentations draw upon and extend the practical language experience of your year abroad. You’ll also cover advanced grammar topics of Russian. You will spend three hours per week in practical classes and workshops.
     
    
   
  
      
   
   Optional  
  
    The Petersburg Text 
   
  
    Through three hours of lectures and seminars each week, you’ll undertake an in-depth analysis of the Russian imperial capital, St Petersburg and its artistic representations. You will study the development of the image of St Petersburg in Russian poetry (Pushkin, Blok, Akhmatova, Mandelshtam) and prose (Gogol, Dostoevsky, Bely, Bitov) of both the 19th and 20th centuries. You’ll also be given a historical overview of the evolution of the legend of St Petersburg, its representations in folklore, and readings of its urban landscape. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Myths and Memories: Histories of Russia's Second World War  
   
  
    This module introduces you to the construction of national and collective memory of the Second World War in Soviet and Russian culture and society. You’ll focus on contemporary and subsequent artistic and social responses to the experience of war, but also look at individual acts of remembering (diaries, reports, letters) in the context of a wider cultural memory. The module is conducted in English and you’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Russian Popular Music in the 20th and 21st Centuries  
   
  
    The module offers an in-depth study of the development of popular music in Russia in the 20th and 21st centuries. You will gain knowledge of the popular musical culture of the late Tsarist, Soviet and post-Soviet eras, and learn to analyse songs and performances using such concepts as authorship, performance, technology and ideology. You will have one lecture and one two-hour seminar per week on this module 
   
  
      
   
   
   History of the Byzantine Empire 
   
   
   
     This module offers advanced study of the history of the Byzantine Empire from the reign of Constantine I to the fall of Constantinople. The course is structured chronologically, focussing on particular themes for each period: religion and heresy in late antiquity; warfare and the arts in middle Byzantium; and politics and international relations in late Byzantium. In an average week you’ll spend around three hours in lectures and seminars on this module.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Russian Language in the 20th Century 
   
  
    You’ll focus on the development of the Russian language during the 20th century in relation to the changing socio-political climate of the period. This modules looks at language as a social and ideologically-charged product and topics covered include the Soviet language and national policies, social stratification of languages, Marxist linguistics, linguistic purism in the Soviet and post-Soviet period, globalisation and post-Soviet Russian language identity. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    East European and Balkan Cultural Studies 
   
  
    The module examines issues covering the division of Europe into East and West, the West’s construction of Russian, East European and Balkan identities in its own imagination, relations between dominant and subordinate cultures in Europe, and theoretical frameworks in which to examine intercultural relations (semiotics, orientalism). You will examine examples of such constructions in travelogues, popular fiction, film and journalism. The module also includes study of the influence of such largely negative views on identity formation within Eastern Europe and the Balkans. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Serbian and Croatian Cinema: Selected Works 
   
  
    Developing your ability in addressing the study of cinema, this module examines the ways in which themes, motifs and narrative structures of films combine to produce semantically complex interfaces through which they also reflect the cultural circumstances of their production. In an average week you’ll spend around six hours in lectures, seminars and film viewings. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Serbian/Croatian for Linguists 
   
  
    This module is a fast-track course of study for students in their final year who wish to acquire a new language. The module is based on the textbook Teach Yourself Serbian and will introduce you to everyday use of the language. Through three hours of practical classes each week, you’ll study different points of grammar (syntax and morphology) as well as vocabulary for everyday situations. 
   
  
      
   
      
  
    Slovene for Linguists 
   
  
    This is hidden 
   
  
      
   
      
  
    From Racial State to Reconstruction: women and gender relations in German, 1939-45  
   
  
    This module adopts a perspective of women&acute;s and gender history to explore the history of Germany in the period from the beginning of the National Socialist dictatorship up to the division of Germany into two post-war states in 1949. It will examine National Socialist discourses, policies and practices in relation to women and gender relations by drawing on records of public authorities and institutions concerned with educating and training the female population in line with Nazi precepts, mobilizing labour for the Nazi war economy, sustaining home front morale, and combating 'threats to the race'. You’ll have a weekly three hour seminar to study for this module. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Italy at War, 1935-45 
   
   
   
     Spending three hours per week in seminars and tutorials, you will be given a framework to understand the experience of Italians (and to a lesser degree their enemies, allies, and collaborators) during the military conflicts in the long decade 1935–45, as well as knowledge of the background factors that shaped these experiences.
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Missing Dimenson: intelligence and international history in the 20th Century 
   
  
    The history of secret intelligence was once called the ‘missing dimension’ in the study of politics and international relations. Today, it has established itself as a separate field of historical enquiry. This module will examine how the study of secret intelligence has informed and sometimes even altered our understanding of some of the major political and international crises of the twentieth century. You will spend three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.