Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of some of the modules we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
   
    Learning History  
   
  
    This module will provide you with the learning skills necessary to make the most of your studies in history. You will be introduced to different approaches in the study of history as well as to different understandings of the functions served by engagement with the past. The module aims to encourage more effective learning, bridge the transition from school or college to university, prepare you for more advanced work in the discipline, and enhance the skills listed. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Introduction to Art History 1  
   
  
    This module introduces you to issues surrounding the making, display, and the act of collecting art objects in different media. You will examine the ways in which these objects were created, factors that led to their creation and the impact of the material condition of the object on its interpretation. In addition, you will look at your study and writing skills relevant to the analysis of the works of art from a variety of media and a variety of historical and geographical backgrounds. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Introduction to Art History 2  
   
  
    This core module studied in conjunction with Introduction to Art History I continues on the foundation laid in the aforementioned module in the autumn semester. You will examine the interpretation of objects by considering different forms of writing on art, including art-historical texts, and their changing pre-occupations. Study and writing skills will feature as constants throughout the semester. In addition, where possible there will be visits to local art collections. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
     Optional  
   
    Matisse, Picasso, Duchamp  
   
  
    In this module, you will study developments in art in Paris between around 1905 to the outbreak of the First World War. The primary focus is on painting, though you will also investigate the relationship between painting and sculpture, as well as between the art object and non-art. Taking in the competing versions of figure composition in the works of Matisse, Derain and Picasso, you will go on to consider the 'Private Cubism' of Picasso and Braque alongside the so-called 'Salon Cubism' of Delauney, Metzinger and Gleizes. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Inventing French Art: From Renaissance to Louis XIV  
   
  
    This module aims to give an overview of French art in the 16th and 17th centuries, examining the functions of art and architecture against social, political and institutional contexts such as the royal court, the Acad&eacute;mie, the growth of Paris and the invention of a national artistic tradition. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Art and Power: Paris 1937  
   
  
    This module focuses on the International Exhibition in Paris in 1937, which provides a survey of art in the service of politics in the years preceding World War II. Participating countries – including the USSR, Germany, Italy, and Spain – were represented by national pavilions combining art and architecture to articulate national values and ambitions. The cultural battles between contrasting styles of state sponsored art, such as Soviet Socialist Realism and German Neoclassicism, will be examined in light of political and military conflicts in a Europe divided by the Spanish Civil War. Important individual works, such as Picasso's Guernica, will be considered alongside the pavilions as unified artworks. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Introduction to the Medieval World, 500–1500  
   
  
    This module provides an introduction to medieval European history in the period 500–1500. It offers a fresh and stimulating approach to the major forces instrumental in the shaping of politics, society and culture in Europe. Through a series of thematically linked lectures and seminars, you will be introduced to key factors determining changes in the European experience over time, as well as important continuities linking the period as a whole. Amongst the topics to be considered are: political structures and organisation, social and economic life and cultural developments. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    From Reformation to Revolution: an introduction to early modern history, 1500–1789  
   
  
    This module introduces you to major issues in the social, political and cultural history of Europe in the early modern period by analysing demographic, religious, social and cultural changes that took place between 1500 and 1789. You will examine the tensions produced by warfare, religious conflict, the changing relationships between rulers, subjects and political elites, trends in socio-economic development and the discovery of the ‘New World’. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Roads to Modernity: an introduction to modern history, 1789–1945  
   
  
    In the first semester, the module provides a chronology of modern history from c.1789–1945 which concentrates principally on key political developments in European and global history such as the French Revolution, the expansion of the European empires and the two World Wars. The second semester will look more broadly at economic, social and cultural issues, such as industrialisation, urbanisation, changing artistic forms and ideological transformations in order to consider the nature of modernity. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Plural Art Histories  
   
  
    In this module, you will be examining selected pieces of art, architecture, and drama from classical Greece, China, Europe, colonial and postcolonial Americas, with some reference to contemporary examples, in order to explore some fundamental questions about art, such as: what is the relationship between creators and the world in which they live? How the arts are made, used, and regarded? In each case, the production and reception of the arts is studied through a contextual approach, paying attention to political, economic, religious, and cultural factors. You will usually spend two hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Two Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
   
    The Contemporary World since 1945  
   
  
    The module surveys and analyses some of the main developments in world affairs since the end of the Second World War. This includes major international events, particularly the course and aftermath of the Cold War, as well as national and regional histories, especially in Europe, East Asia and the Middle East; the module also looks at key political and social movements. Attention is paid to political, economic and social forces. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
     Optional  
   
    Heroes and Villains in the Middle Ages  
   
  
    The module compares and contrasts key historical, legendary and fictional figures to examine the development of western medieval values and ideologies such as monasticism, chivalry and kingship. It explores how individuals shaped ideal types and how they themselves strove to match medieval archetypes. The binary oppositions between ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are explored through study of the ‘bad king’, and the creation of villains such as the Jew. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    The Crusades  
   
  
    This module addresses evidence for crusader motivation and experience through sources relating to crusading activity in Europe and the Middle East from the late eleventh century to the mid-13th century. It seeks to understand how crusaders saw themselves and their enemies, their experiences and activity on crusade and as settlers, and how this horrifying yet enduringly fascinating process has been interpreted historically. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    The Venetian Republic, 1450–1575  
   
  
    This module explores the nature of the Venetian Republic in the later 15nth and 16th centuries. It examines the constitution, its administrative and judicial system, its imperial and military organisation, but will above all focus on the city and its inhabitants itself. The module will discuss the enormous cultural dynamism of the city (especially the visual arts from the Bellini to Tintoretto and Veronese), changing urban fabric, the role of ritual and ceremony, the position of the Church, and class and gender. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    De-Industrialisation: A Social and Cultural History, 1970–1990  
   
  
    This module examines the social and cultural impact of economic change in three traditional industrial regions in the UK, Germany and the US in the 1970s and 1980s. It takes thematic approaches, exploring topics including: overlaps and differences between Contemporary History and the Social Sciences; change and decline in traditional industries such as coal, steel and shipbuilding; political responses to industrial change, with a particular focus on industrial conflict over closures, among others. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Work and Play in Modern European Art, 1750–1900  
   
   
    This module considers representations of leisure and labour from the mid-18th century to the early 20th. With particular attention paid to the activities available to women during this period, you will consider the ideological and material conditions of industrialisation, migration, urban life, and entertainment and their impact on the fundamental activities of work and play. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Women in the Italian Renaissance 1500–1600: Art and History  
   
  
    The first part of this module will provide an introduction to women's history in the later medieval and early modern Italian context, looking at the domestic and political roles of women in the light of gender and sexuality. The second part of the module looks at the role of Renaissance women in the art of the period. With diverse surviving visual evidence (such as painted furniture and funerary epigraphs), classes will focus on, among others, the role of Biblical and patristic writings in shaping attitudes towards women, the role of the family and marriage in fashioning gender relations, and women as patrons and producers of art. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Los Angeles Art and Architecture, 1945–1980  
   
  
    In this module, you will be introduced to a number of artistic and architectural practices that emerges in Southern California after 1945. You will also explore the cultural and historical context of a number of artistic practices, as well as the role of Los Angeles in the development of post-1945 American art and architecture, including mid-century modernism, Pop Art, Conceptual Art and Light & Space Art. A central question in this module will be whether all art made in Los Angeles can be classified as ‘Los Angeles Art’. You will usually spend three hours in lectures and seminars each week.
    
   
  
      
   
      
   You will also attend a non-assessed weekly lecture module throughout the year called ‘Doing History’. This builds on the first-year core module Learning History and aims to develop your awareness of the craft of the historian, developing essential skills to get the most out of your second-year options and enabling you to determine what sort of historian you are. It also operates as a bridge to your third and final year, permitting you to make informed decisions about your choice of Special Subject, third-year options, and dissertation.  
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
   Optional  
   
    Dissertation  
   
   
    The module involves an in-depth, semester-long study of a topic in art history following consultation with a tutor and approval from the module convener/ Head of Department. You may also choose to do a 10,000 dissertation research project in History instead. There is a minimum requirement of two hours supervision with your tutor, with further time allocated at their discretion. Regular attendance at tutorials/workshops is a requirement for the completion of this module. This option is also available as a full-year dissertation.  
   
  
      
   
   
    British Romantic Art  
   
  
    In this module, you will examine aspects of the development of British art between 1790–1850. Individual artists such as Blake, Turner, and Constable, will be studied in the context of, among others, the organisation of the London art world, the cultural consequences of British isolation during the wars of the Revolution and Empire, and the establishment of a British canon. Themes addressed may include the apocalyptic, scientific method and radical naturalism, and industry and the supernatural. The module consists of one 2-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Renaissance Luxuries: Art and Good Living in Italy 1400–1600  
   
  
    This module seeks to engage with the Renaissance as a period of conspicuous consumption of a range of luxury goods, and examines the social, cultural and economic factors which characterised the period 1400–1600. Amongst the issues raised in lectures and seminars will be the importance of objects as signifier of status, magnificence, the diversification of objects and the concomitant rise in specialised living arrangements, and women as consumers of art. In this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and a one 2-hour seminar each week.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Kings, Saints and Monsters in England 450–850  
   
  
    This module examines cultural and political changes in the southern half of the island of Britain between the fifth and ninth centuries, in particular the development of kingship and kingdoms as a form of political organisation, and the effects of the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity. You will spend three hours in lectures and seminars studying for this module.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Italy at War 1939–45  
   
  
    Spending three hours per week in seminars and tutorials, you will be given a framework to understand the experience of Italians (and to a lesser degree their enemies, allies, and collaborators) during the military conflicts in the long decade 1935–45, as well as knowledge of the background factors that shaped these experiences. As source material you will have the chance to explore diplomatic correspondence, personal memoirs, newspapers and magazines, newsreels, as well as examining the representation of the war in literature and cinema.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Samurai Revolution, Inventing Japan 1853–78  
   
  
    This module surveys the dramatic cultural encounter in the 19th century as the world of the samurai was confronted by Western expansion and the Age of Steam. It explores the forces at work in Japan’s rapid transformation from an ‘ancien r&eacute;gime’ under the rule of the Shogun into a ‘modern’ imperial power. Original documents examined in class draw on the growing range of Japanese primary sources available in English translation, together with the extensive works of Victorian diplomats, newspaper correspondents and other foreign residents in the treaty ports. You will have three hours of lectures and seminars for this module.
    
   
  
      
   
   
    American Visual Cultures  
   
  
    The module examines the visual culture of America from the late 19th century to the present day. The module explores how visual culture – art, advertising, architecture, cinema, television, cartography, video, the internet and images of science – has transformed and shaped the image of the United States. The module looks closely at a series of themes: urban and rural landscapes, icons and iconography, art and photography, race and gender in the US, high and low culture, sex and sexuality. The module also introduces various visual and critical theories which help us better understand the visual cultures of the United States.