Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Russian 1 - Beginners A 
   
   
    The module provides the opportunity to learn Russian to approximately GCSE level as a basis for study to honours degree level. Students study grammar and syntax, acquire vocabulary, read simple texts, and engage in simple conversations on personal subjects. They also learn about daily life in Russia.  
   
  
      
   
      
  
    Russian 1 - Beginners B 
   
  
    This module continues the development of Russian language skills begun in R82100 [Russian 1 - Beginners A] and aims to take students to approximately A-level by the end of the semester.
    
   
  
      
   
   Or  
   
   Russian 1  
    
   
   
    You’ll consolidate and develop your knowledge of Russian which you have gained at A level. This module focuses on practical application of your language skills, including reading, writing, comprehension and oral communication. You will also study some grammar topics in depth.  You’ll spend around nine hours per week in practical classes workshops and tutorials, benefiting from experienced teachers most of whom are native speakers and the use of excellent language laboratory facilities.
      
   
  
      
   
   
   Nation, Myth, Identity: Introduction to Russian and Slavonic Studies 
   
   
    This module introduces students to important areas and topics in Russian and Slavonic Studies, examining important aspects of the histories and cultures of the region, as well as aspects of the languages, cultures and literary traditions. You will learn to analyse a wide range of cultural phenomena, including pictures, music, film, literary texts and other kinds of written sources.  
   
  
      
   
   Optional  
   
    From Tsarism to Communism: Introduction to Russian History and Culture  
   
   
    This module introduces you to the development of Russian history and culture, starting with the reign of Peter the Great (1682-1725), following the development of Russia into a modern state through to the end of the 19th century, and ending with a survey of the Bolshevik Revolution and the Soviet period (1917-1991). Alongside the history of Russia, you will study aspects of Russian culture relevant to different periods of its history (such as painting, architecture, music, folklore and religious beliefs).You will have three hours per week in lectures and seminars.   
   
  
      
   
   
   Modern Russian Literature: Texts, Contexts, Approaches 
   
   
    This module introduces the main developments in Russian literature of the 19th and 20th centuries through study of texts by important writers such as Pushkin, Gogol, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov, Zamiatin, Mayakovsky, Akhmatova and Solzhenitsyn. You will learn skills for analysing and discussing literary texts, whether prose, poetry or drama, as well as insights into the historical and political evolution of Russia during this period.   
   
  
      
   
  
    The Clash of Empires: Introduction to Balkan Cultural Identities  
   
   
    
     This module introduces you to the cultural history of South Slavs and the legacy of great empires such as the Ottomans, and the Habsburgs on the Balkan peninsula. By focusing on the visual cultures of the three key religious traditions – Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic and Islamic – the module explores the common features and differences in alphabet, architecture, sculpture and painting across the region. You will learn how living under empires informed the self-understanding of Serbs, Croats, Bosniaks and other South Slav nations.  
    
   
  
      
   
   Students on the post A level pathway may opt to study a second Slavonic language (Serbian/Croatian or Slovene) from beginners' level in Year One.  
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Two Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Russian 2 
   
  
    You’ll consolidate and develop your knowledge of Russian which you have gained at A level. This module focuses on practical application of your language skills, including reading, writing, comprehension and oral communication. You will also study some grammar topics in depth.  You’ll spend around nine hours per week in practical classes workshops and tutorials, benefiting from experienced teachers most of whom are native speakers and the use of excellent language laboratory facilities. 
   
  
      
   Or 
   
   Russian Comprehension and Oral 
   
   
    This module will help you to develop your comprehension of Russian and your communicative skills, including reading, oral fluency in Russian, and translation from Russian into English. The module also includes some writing in Russian and study of more sophisticated grammar topics. You’ll spend three hours per week in practical classes and lectures.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
   
   Screening Russia: Film and Society from the Tsars to Putin 
   
   
    In this module you will acquire an in-depth understanding of developments in Russian society and culture as reflected in popular and influential films from the period 1900 to 2010. You’ll examine how films are constructed technically and develop skills in analysing cinema in its historical and social contexts. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars  
   
  
      
   
   
   Repression and Resistance: Dissidents and Exiles in Russian Culture 
   
   
    This module provides you with an introduction to the themes of dissidence and exile, central notions in Russian literature, culture and thinking, using the examples of the life and work of four major Russian writers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (Pushkin, Dostoevsky, Nabokov, Bulgakov). You will learn the theory of different literary forms (verse narrative, novel, short story and drama).  
   
  
      
   
   
   Serbian and Croatian Literature in 20th Century
    
   
   
    You’ll examine major literary movements in Serbia and Croatia during the 20th century, from Modernism to the socially engaged literature of the 1930s, Socialist Realism, literary politics under the Communists in Yugoslavia and the emergence of critical literature in the 1980s and 1990s. You’ll also undertake a textual analysis of representative works from 20th century literature; for example, works by Milos Crnjanski, Ivo Andrić, Miroslav Krleža, Danilo Kiš and Slobodan Selenić. You’ll spend around two hours per week studying in lectures and seminars. 
       
   
  
      
   
   
   History of Yugoslavia from 1941
    
   
   
    The aim of this module is to examine developments in the political, social and diplomatic history of Yugoslavia after 1941 leading towards an understanding of the reasons behind the collapse of the country and subsequent violence in the 1990s. You’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module. 
       
   
  
      
   
   
    Medieval Russia: Rus and Muscovy, c. 900-170  
   
   
    This module introduces the medieval period in the history of the East Slavs, covering pre-Christian times to the rise of the Romanov dynasty. You will focus on both political and cultural developments and learn to assess primary sources in various media (texts, painting, architecture) for seminar discussions and essays.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Russian Novel  
   
  
    This module offers an in-depth analysis of world classics of the novel genre - from nineteenth-century pioneers of realism such as Pushkin and Gogol, through the masterpieces of Dostoevsky and Tolstoy, to the revolutionary advances of Russian prose fiction in the twentieth century. 
   
  
      
   
      
   *In addition, you may choose one or two Year One modules not taken in your first year  
   All students have the option of beginning (or continuing) a second Slavonic language (Serbian/Croatian or Slovene).  
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Year Three (Year Abroad)
   
  
  
   In your third year of study you will spend the academic year abroad in Russia. You will be supported by our Year Abroad team in preparation for this period in Year Two. You have the option to study at one of our partner universities in Russia or at a language school, or to undertake an approved work placement. It is also possible to combine study with working. If you are taking a second Slavonic language, you will be able to divide your time to cover the countries of both languages.  
   Please see the Department of Russian and Slavonic Studies Year Abroad webpage.  
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Four Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
   
   Russian 3 
    
   
   
    Through this module you’ll develop a high level of Russian language skills, both written and oral. The written skills include English-Russian and Russian-English translation, production of summaries and creative writing in Russian. Oral presentations draw upon and extend the practical language experience of your year abroad. You’ll also cover advanced grammar topics of Russian. You will spend two hours in practical classes and two hours in workshops per week.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional  
   
   Serbian/Croatian for Linguists
    
   
   
    This module is a fast-track course of study for students in their final year who wish to acquire a new language. The module is based on the textbook Teach Yourself Serbian and will introduce you to everyday use of the language. Through three hours of practical classes each week, you’ll study different points of grammar (syntax and morphology) as well as vocabulary for everyday situations.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Myths and Memories
    
   
   
    This module introduces you to the construction of national and collective memory of the Second World War in Soviet and Russian culture and society. You’ll focus on contemporary and subsequent artistic and social responses to the experience of war, but also look at individual acts of remembering (diaries, reports, letters) in the context of a wider cultural memory. The module is conducted in English and you’ll spend around three hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Petersburg Text
    
   
   
    Through three hours of lectures and seminars each week, you’ll undertake an in-depth analysis of the Russian imperial capital, St Petersburg and its artistic representations. You will study the development of the image of St Petersburg in Russian poetry (Pushkin, Blok, Akhmatova, Mandelshtam) and prose (Gogol, Dostoevsky, Bely, Bitov) of both the 19th and 20th centuries. You’ll also be given a historical overview of the evolution of the legend of St Petersburg, its representations in folklore, and readings of its urban landscape.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Serbian and Croatian Cinema
    
   
   
    Developing your ability in addressing the study of cinema, this module examines the ways in which themes, motifs and narrative structures of films combine to produce semantically complex interfaces through which they also reflect the cultural circumstances of their production. In an average week you’ll spend around six hours in lectures, seminars and film viewings. 
      
   
  
      
   
   
   Russian Language in the 20th Century
    
   
   
    You’ll focus on the development of the Russian language during the 20th century in relation to the changing socio-political climate of the period. This modules looks at language as a social and ideologically-charged product and topics covered include the Soviet language and national policies, social stratification of languages, Marxist linguistics, linguistic purism in the Soviet and post-Soviet period, globalisation and post-Soviet Russian language identity. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.
      
   
  
      
   
  
    The History of the Byzantine Empire, 300-1453 
   
   
    This module offers advanced study of the history of the Byzantine Empire from the reign of Constantine I to the fall of Constantinople. The course is structured chronologically, focusing on particular themes for each period: religion and heresy in late antiquity; warfare and the arts in middle Byzantium; and politics and international relations in late Byzantium. In an average week you’ll spend around three hours in lectures and seminars on this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Slovene for Linguists 
   
  
    This is a fast-track course of study for students in their final year who wish to acquire a new language. The module is based on materials and teaching methods developed by the Centre for Slovene as a Second/Foreign Language, and its aim is to introduce you to everyday use of the language using a communicative approach. Through three hours of practical classes each week, you’ll study different points of grammar (syntax and morphology) as well as vocabulary for everyday situations. 
   
  
      
   
  
    East European and Balkan Cultural Studies 
   
   
    The module examines issues covering the division of Europe into East and West, the West’s construction of Russian, East European and Balkan identities in its own imagination, relations between dominant and subordinate cultures in Europe, and theoretical frameworks in which to examine intercultural relations (semiotics, orientalism). You will examine examples of such constructions in travelogues, popular fiction, film and journalism. The module also includes study of the influence of such largely negative views on identity formation within Eastern Europe and the Balkans.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Russian Popular Music in the 20th and 21st Centuries  
   
   
    The module offers an in-depth study of the development of popular music in Russia in the 20th and 21st centuries. You will gain knowledge of the popular musical culture of the late Tsarist, Soviet and post-Soviet eras, and learn to analyse songs and performances using such concepts as authorship, performance, technology and ideology. You will have one lecture and one two-hour seminar per week on this module.