Modules  
  A total of 360 academic credits are taken over three years, divided into 120 credits per year. This is the equivalent of 40 hours of University-based study per week, or 40 hours per week of practice based learning. A typical week of University based learning will include 12-15 hours of time spent in lectures/seminars/tutorials and the remainder in private study.   
  Assessment is by written assignments, individual and group presentations, projects, and seen and unseen written examinations.   
  The staff who teach on the programme have national and international reputations for the quality of their research and publications and this knowledge at all times informs their teaching.   
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer. There is the option in each year to take a module from another school.  
  Typical year one modules  
  Core  
 
   Communication Skills for Practice 
  
  
   The module introduces students to a range of theories, skills and evidence-based practice in relation to communication with service-users and carers. Students will study theories of communication and perception. They will be assisted through group work, experiential learning exercises and self-reflection to develop basic skills for interviewing and assessment. These will be augmented by learning around theories and skills concerning work in group contexts and in situations of conflict where social workers are required to exercise professional authority.  
   Throughout the module students' attention will be drawn to the values and ethics which underpin professional practice and the broad organisation, legal and policy context in which it takes place. Students will be introduced to work with a diversity of service-user groups and required to consider the implications of this diversity for their mode of communication. They will also be encouraged to develop a critical awareness of the various theoretical perspectives presented in the module alongside an ability to apply this knowledge to social work practice.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide an overview of evidence-based practice in relation to interpersonal communication in social work practice  
    provide an introduction to key theories explaining interpersonal communication  
    encourage and promote reflection on the self in relation to interpersonal communication   
    support the development of basic communication skills with a diversity of service-user groups in social work practice   
    recognise the values and ethics which underpin professional practice in conjunction with the broad organisational, legal and policy context in which interaction with service-users and carers takes place  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Introduction to Social Work 
  
  
   This module will introduce students to the core knowledge, skills, ethics and values underpinning social work practice. Students will be encouraged to develop a sense of what it means to be a reflective practitioner. They will be taught a range of approaches to social work practice, what it means to be 'professional' and the impact of the 'use of self'. They will explore the service user/carer perspective and underpinning anti-oppressive principles for working with inequality and diversity.  
   Students will be given the opportunity to practice generic key skills and their understanding of the social work role through innovative teaching methods including role play and observations. They will also be given the opportunity to spend time shadowing and observing a social care practitioner in their work.  
   The module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the social work role in an organisational context   
    introduce students to the principles, values and ethics underpinning social work practice   
    familiarise students with inequality and the diversity of service-user groups   
    enable students to have an understanding of the 'use of self' in social work practice   
    enable students to develop skills of active learning and critical thinking   
    offer students the opportunity to learn from experienced practitioners and service users/carers   
    develop students' ability to identify their own learning needs  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Investigating Social Worlds 
  
  
   This module introduces students to philosophical debates on the production of knowledge about the social world, examining the interlocking philosophical and ethical problems that can arise when the methods of the natural sciences are applied to the study of the social world.  
   It then introduces two of the major research traditions within the social sciences, positivism and interpretavism and explores their links to some basic methods of data gathering employed in the social sciences, including survey methods, interviewing, and observation, providing students with some preliminary "hands-on" experience of working with a variety of sources and methods.  
   The module's key aims are to:  
   
    equip students with a basic understanding of philosophical debates about the production of knowledge of the social world, and the relevance of these debates for research methods   
    introduce students to two research traditions within the social sciences  
    introduce students to some of the main research methods employed within the social sciences and provide them with some very preliminary 'hands-on' experience of data collection and analysis   
    make students aware of the ethical dimension of social scientists' decisions about research design and methods   
    provide students with a foundation upon which to develop an ability to formulate appropriate questions and conduct social research and an ability to carry out sociological research in a methodologically informed way  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Policy and Social Justice 
  
  
   This module introduces students to the main areas of social policy in the United Kingdom. The module first explores the concepts of policy, justice and key theories in policy and welfare as well as resourcing. The module then goes on to examine the role of the family in welfare provision, and the operation of key public sector services (housing, NHS, social care, social security).  
   The module aims to:  
   
    provide students with a basic knowledge of social problems in the UK and to introduce a critical analysis of the social policies and welfare institutions which exist to meet them, through the use of specific examples  
    equip students with a critical understanding of how contemporary social and human needs emerge and are addressed by a range of state, market and familial arrangements  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Understanding Contemporary Society 
  
  
   This module introduces students to a range of approaches in social analysis. Through introductions to key concepts, theorists and research studies in the disciplines of sociology, cultural studies and social policy, students will be equipped with the skills necessary for more advanced study of contemporary society.  
   This module aims to equip students with:  
   
    knowledge of a range of contemporary and historical debates within social analysis   
    an understanding of approaches to thinking about society in the disciplines of sociology, cultural studies and social policy   
    an understanding of the practical, political and ethical dimensions of social analysis   
    skills in discovering and critically appraising relevant academic literature  
   
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year two modules  
  Core  
 
   From Theory to Practice 
  
  
   The module provides an introduction to social work theories and models, and to the methods through which they are applied. The module seeks to develop the theoretical learning that is needed in order to practice reflectively and effectively by promoting understanding of the principles and concepts which constitute various approaches.  
   The module will include a consideration of some of the main theories underpinning social work, including person-centred approaches, systems theory, cognitive-behavioural theory, etc; some of the models that can be applied to social work, including task-centred work, assessment, etc and some of the methods of intervention that social workers are required to practice, including interviewing skills and solution-focused approaches. This module also requires students to demonstrate their readiness for practice.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    provide an overview of the theories, methods and models deployed by practising social workers   
    prepare students to use the theories, models and methods in practice settings   
    enable students to explore personal and professional value systems which can impact on social work practice   
    prepare students for their readiness to practice  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Human Growth and Development 
  
  
   The module provides students with an introduction to a range of theories and evidence about human growth and development. Students will be enabled to understand the ways in which human growth and development is affected by a range of factors across the life course and how these factors may impact on the development of resilience and well-being. They are encouraged to develop a critical awareness of the various theoretical perspectives alongside an ability to apply this knowledge to social work practice.  
   The module follows a life course perspective, tracking human growth and development from the cradle to the grave and draws on theoretical material from a range of different disciplines.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide an overview of human development through the life course, exploring how this is influenced by a wide range of determinants   
    offer an introduction to some of the major theoretical perspectives around human growth and development   
    consider challenges to human development across the life course and their implications for the development of resilience and wellbeing   
    consider the application of these theories in social work practice  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Law for Social Work 
  
  
   This module prepares students with an introduction to relevant legislation, policies and guidance for social work practice with a variety of service users. The programme recognises the centrality fo the law and its interaction with policy and research in promoting and safeguarding the welfare of children and adults, and the necessity for practitioners to be confident when representing agencies and working with service usrs in legislative contexts.  
   To enable a better understanding and application of law to practice, the module includes a general consideration of the English legal system and considers areas around court structure, civil vs. criminal procedures; differing burdens of proof; duties vs. powers; delegated legislation and so on. It focuses on specific legislative frameworks for working with children, including youth justice, older people and people with mental health problems.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    affirm the centrality of social work practice within a legal context   
    consider critically the philosophy and scope of law relating to social work practice under specific pieces of legislation, policies and guidance  
    build legal knowledge and skills, particularly around court work, to help recognise the relationship between the law and social workers' accountability   
    focus on particular knowledge and understanding of key components and themes found in the relevant legislation including child care, adult care, youth justice and mental health   
    identify and evaluate the ethical principles informing good practice under the law  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Social Work Research 
  
  
   Research perspectives: When and how do social workers use research? The module considers the ways in which social workers (should) use research in practice and explores the concept of research-mindedness in social work.  
   Social workers need research to practise effectively; to understand service users' lives, make informed decisions and to change/develop organisations. Putting empirical evidence into practice will be explored using an applied approach and concrete examples from peer-reviewed papers.  
   The module aims to:  
   
    provide students with a framework for understanding the place of research in social work  
    develop students as research-minded practitioners  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Theories of Welfare 
  
  
   As an academic subject social policy is underpinned by a wide variety of social, political and economic theories. Without an understanding of these theories our analyses of both society and of welfare systems are likely to be inadequate. For instance, we may overlook the extent to which policies and welfare reforms are sometimes based upon weak theoretical foundations and assumptions.  
   This module explores a range of both traditional and contemporary themes and concepts, including liberty, equality, citizenship, needs, class, old and new welfare ideologies, as well as recent developments in welfare theory.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Practice Learning 1 - 80-day placement 
  
  
   This module comprises 80 days of assessed practice learning. It will focus on students' ability to satisfy the requirements of the Professional Capabilities Framework at the interim stage of judgement.  
   The placement will be assessed on a pass/fail basis and must be passed in order to progress on the programme. The written assignment must be passed in order to progress on the programme; students who fail the written assignment may be required to resubmit without having to complete a further placement.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    provide students with an opportunity to engage with the requirements of social work practice, as defined by the Health and Care Professions Council and the College of Social Work  
    give students an opportunity to prepare for, and work with individuals, families, carers, groups and communities to assess their needs and circumstances  
    enable students to plan, carry out, review and evaluate social work practice, with individuals, families, carers, groups, communities and other professionals   
    provide students with an opportunity to support individuals to represent their needs, views and circumstances   
    enhance their capacity to reflect upon their social work practice  
   
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year three modules  
  Core  
 
   Contemporary Issues in Adult Social Work 
  
  
   This module acts as the bridge between academic learning and professional qualifying practice. It provides students with an insight into topical issues for practice through a series of workshops led by expert practitioners and /or academic staff. Alongside these issues based teaching sessions will be run that enable and expect students to make the links between the learning and their own professional development.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop in students a framework for reflective learning that they continue to use in practice  
    introduce students to topical themes in contemporary practice and policy with children and families   
    provide students with an understanding of the lived experiences of those needing and using social work services  
    support students to begin to develop an understanding of their professional development and current and future learning needs   
    provide opportunities for students to connect academic learning with practice  
    provide students with the opportunity to reflect on the values and ethical frameworks for effective social work practice  
   
  
 
     
  
 OR 
 
   Contemporary Issues in Child and Family Social Work 
  
  
   This module acts as the bridge between academic learning and professional qualifying practice. It provides students with an insight into topical issues for practice through a series of workshops led by expert practitioners and/or academic staff. Alongside these issues based teaching sessions will be run that enable and expect students to make the links between the learning and their own professional development.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide students with a framework for reflective learning that they continue to use in practice   
    offer students insights into topical themes in contemporary practice and policy with children and families   
    provide students with an understanding of the lived experiences of those needing and using social work services  
    ensure students develop an understanding of their professional development and current and future learning needs   
    provide opportunities for students to connect academic learning with practice  
    provide students with the opportunity to reflect on the values and ethical frameworks for effective social work practice  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Critical Perspectives on Social Work 
  
  
   This module examines the nature of knowledge in social work and some of the main social theories which conceptualise the nature of social work and its relationship to the state, society and the individual. Students will be enabled to understand how different theoretical approaches provide different ways of thinking about the nature of social work in advanced modern societies and their implications for social work practice.  
   The theories and debates covered will include the role of research in social work and evidence-based practice; reflexivity; structure/agency, power and inequalities; psychoanalysis and the place of emotions. At the heart of the module will be a focus on developing knowledge and skills for reflective practice and a grounding of social worker-service user encounters in a relational context.  
   The educational aims of the module are to:  
   
    enable students to understand how different theoretical perspectives seek to explain and define what social work is   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the role of research in social work   
    examine competing theoretical and ideological perspectives on the self, the individual and social action   
    enable students to further develop their understanding of theory and practice and of strategies aimed at promoting relationship-based practice and social justice in a rapidly evolving social and cultural context  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Safeguarding 
  
  
   This module will introduce students to key theoretical, legal and practice aspects of safeguarding children and vulnerable adults. It will require students to engage in learning from previous situations in which social work intervention has failed to protect children or vulnerable adults from abuse.  
   The module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to existing child protection and adult safeguarding systems, including an awareness of the contexts in which these services have developed   
    enable students to understand the different approaches indicated by the terms 'protection' and 'safeguarding'   
    introduce students to concepts of risk assessment and risk management   
    enable students to acquire some knowledge of current law, policy and practice in relation to both child protection and adult safeguarding - including the importance of learning from past cases   
    deepen students' awareness of how issues of power and discrimination are relevant to this aspect of social work practice   
    challenge students to consider how their personal and professional experiences may impact on their interpretation of service users' lives  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Practice Learning 2 - 90-day placement 
  
  
   This module comprises 90 days of practice learning. It will focus on students' ability to satisfy the requirements of the Professional Capabilities Framework at the final stage of their qualification.  
   To pass this module both the 90 day placement and the practice analysis assignment must be passed. If the 90 day placement is not passed the entire 90 day placement has to be repeated and the assignment has to be submitted as a first sit. If the assignment is failed this can be resubmitted without the placement being repeated.  
   The educational aims of this module are to:  
   
    provide students with an opportunity to engage with the requirements of social work practice, as defined by the Health and Care Professions Council and the College of Social Work  
    give students an opportunity to prepare for, and work with individuals, families, carers, groups and communities to assess their needs and circumstances   
    enable students to plan, carry out, review and evaluate social work practice, with individuals, families, carers, groups, communities and other professionals   
    provide students with an opportunity to support individuals to represent their needs, views and circumstances   
    enable students to manage risk to individuals, families, carers, groups, communities, self and colleagues  
    provide an opportunity for students to manage and be accountable, with supervision and support, for their own social work practice within the organisational context  
    enable students to demonstrate professional competence in social work practice   
    enhance their capacity to reflect upon their social work practice  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Practice Learning  
  Through practice based learning - undertaken in a variety of settings, working with a range of different service users - you will be introduced to a variety of approaches to helping people. You will spend a total of 170 days in practice during your degree. Each period of practice learning will be assessed against the requirements of the Professional Capabilities Framework.  
  We have excellent links with statutory and voluntary agencies in the region, which provide practice learning opportunities for our students. We have an outstanding record of providing high quality placements. We recognise that this is a vital part of your learning during your degree and work hard to ensure that placements are successful in meeting students’ needs. Students and practice assessors are well supported by the programme throughout the practice learning.   
  All placements are undertaken on a full-time basis and while on placement students are expected to work the same hours as other members of staff in that setting.   
  When allocating practice learning placements, care is taken to match individual student's learning needs and personal requirements to the opportunities offered within a particular organisation. Placements are normally within the geographical boundaries of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire.