Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer. There is the option in each year to take modules from other schools and departments.  
  Typical year one modules  
  Core  
 
   Investigating Social Worlds 
  
  
   This module introduces students to philosophical debates on the production of knowledge about the social world, examining the interlocking philosophical and ethical problems that can arise when the methods of the natural sciences are applied to the study of the social world.  
   It then introduces two of the major research traditions within the social sciences, positivism and interpretavism and explores their links to some basic methods of data gathering employed in the social sciences, including survey methods, interviewing, and observation, providing students with some preliminary "hands-on" experience of working with a variety of sources and methods.  
   The module's key aims are to:  
   
    equip students with a basic understanding of philosophical debates about the production of knowledge of the social world, and the relevance of these debates for research methods   
    introduce students to two research traditions within the social sciences  
    introduce students to some of the main research methods employed within the social sciences and provide them with some very preliminary 'hands-on' experience of data collection and analysis   
    make students aware of the ethical dimension of social scientists' decisions about research design and methods   
    provide students with a foundation upon which to develop an ability to formulate appropriate questions and conduct social research and an ability to carry out sociological research in a methodologically informed way  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Policy and Social Justice 
  
  
   This module introduces students to the main areas of social policy in the United Kingdom. The module first explores the concepts of policy, justice and key theories in policy and welfare as well as resourcing. The module then goes on to examine the role of the family in welfare provision, and the operation of key public sector services (housing, NHS, social care, social security).  
   The module aims to:  
   
    provide students with a basic knowledge of social problems in the UK and to introduce a critical analysis of the social policies and welfare institutions which exist to meet them, through the use of specific examples  
    equip students with a critical understanding of how contemporary social and human needs emerge and are addressed by a range of state, market and familial arrangements  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Understanding Contemporary Society 
  
  
   This module introduces students to a range of approaches in social analysis. Through introductions to key concepts, theorists and research studies in the disciplines of sociology, cultural studies and social policy, students will be equipped with the skills necessary for more advanced study of contemporary society.  
   This module aims to equip students with:  
   
    knowledge of a range of contemporary and historical debates within social analysis   
    an understanding of approaches to thinking about society in the disciplines of sociology, cultural studies and social policy   
    an understanding of the practical, political and ethical dimensions of social analysis   
    skills in discovering and critically appraising relevant academic literature  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
  You can either select three introductory modules from the list below, or select two introductory modules from the list below plus one module from another school.  
 
   Culture, Identities and Deviance 
  
  
   The module outlines key theoretical approaches and concepts associated with the analysis of culture, identities and deviance. It introduces these topics through a series of case studies.  
   The module aims to ensure that students will:  
   
    gain an appreciation of the role of culture in social life, through developing an understanding of key concepts and theories   
    understand the ways in which cultural ideas and practices intersect with identities and generate forms of compliance and resistance   
    understand the ways in which symbolic accounts of the world are produced, circulated, and diversely received and consumed  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Exploring Criminology 
  
  
   This module lays the foundations for further study by looking at the development of criminology as a discipline before going on to consider how crime is defined and counted, and investigate the sources of criminological knowledge.  
   The main focus of the module is on key theoretical perspectives in criminology, and how they help us to understand and explain different kinds of criminal behaviour from 'juvenile delinquency' to state crime, 'hate crime' to terrorism (and society's responses to them).  
   The aim of this module is to introduce students to criminology and to the ways in which criminological ideas and theories can help us to understand contemporary crime problems. The module is also intended to equip you with some of the skills you will need to study criminology successfully at university.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Global Studies and Human Rights 
  
  
   The module outlines key theoretical approaches and concepts associated with the analysis of processes of globalisation (social, economic and political) and their implications for human rights. It introduces these topics through a series of case studies.  
   The module aims to ensure that students will:  
   
    gain an appreciation of the importance of social, political and economic aspects of globalisation, through developing an understanding of key concepts and theories   
    understand the ways in which these processes intersect to produce particular patterns of inequality and new social movements  
    understand the significance of the processes for human rights  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Society, Health and Environment 
  
  
   The module introduces students to key theoretical approaches and concepts in the Sociology of risk, of health and medicine, and of the environment. These are applied to a range of case studies.  
   The module aims for students to get an understanding of key theoretical approaches in various fields of sociology, such as cultural sociology, sociology of health and medicine, and the sociology of risk and the environment. Special attention will be given to media coverage, to pressure groups, to scientists, and to politics. A range of case studies will be explored, ranging from autism and AIDS to climate change and nuclear power.  
  
 
     
  
     
  Typical year two modules  
  Core  
 
   Applied Ethics and Society 
  
  
   The module will explore the application of moral philosophy and applied ethics to various social issues including, but not limited to, addiction, abortion, euthanasia, migration and global justice.   
   It will review the main ideas and theorists from the fields of consequentialism, deontology and virtue ethics and it will introduce students to the contemporary state of various socially and ethically problematic topics.  
   The module aims to:  
   
    equip students with an understanding of the principal schools of moral philosophy  
    introduce them to the field of applied ethics  
    apply this knowledge to various contemporary issues that are crucial and controversial matters of public debate  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Classical and Contemporary Sociological Theory 
  
  
   This module examines selected work by major 19th and 20th century social theorists in relation to three main themes:  
   
    What were the major arguments and conceptual innovations introduced by classical sociologists?   
    How can classical sociological theory illuminate contemporary social debates?   
    On what grounds should certain thinkers be described as 'classical'? What determines whether or not a theorist belongs to the canon of sociological thought? How does social and political context shape the development of sociological theory?  
   
   This module aims to equip students to understand the broad theoretical and methodological positions adopted by a range of social theorists, classic and contemporary, and the way their perspectives have been taken up.  
   The classes revolve around a series of readings and discussion themes designed to help students master theoretical discourses and the claims they contain and to explore how they can be used and modified to conduct the sociological analysis of contemporary phenomena.  
  
 
     
  
 
   Political Theory and Social Policy 
  
  
   As an academic subject social policy is underpinned by a wide variety of social, political and economic theories. Without an understanding of these theories our analyses of both society and of welfare systems are likely to be inadequate. For instance, we may overlook the extent to which policies and welfare reforms are sometimes based upon weak theoretical foundations and assumptions.  
   This module explores a range of both traditional and contemporary themes and concepts, including liberty, equality, citizenship, needs, class, old and new welfare ideologies, as well as recent developments in welfare theory.  
   The module aims to:  
   
    deepen students' understanding of social policy through detailed analyses of specific theoretical issues  
    enable students to utilise abstract concepts and principles themselves, relating these to 'real life' themes and problems  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Design and Practice 
  
  
   This module introduces students to the principles of research design and research ethics in relation to both quantitative and qualitative research, and provides them with some experience of survey methods and of qualitative research methods in social research.  
   The module aims to provide an introduction to principles of research design and research ethics relating to the collection and analysis of quantitative and qualitative data and an understanding of the contexts in which quantitative and qualitative research strategies are appropriate. It will explore the basic principles of survey research and its practical components, and address the strengths and limitations of this research methodology.  
   It will introduce students to qualitative research methods and to give them some experience of carrying out qualitative research in a preliminary way and equip students with a critical understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of qualitative research.  
   It aims to equip students with a basic understanding of the range of qualitative and quantitative research methods available, and the respective strengths and weaknesses of each.  
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
  Two optional modules. Browse the list of year two modules which the school offers. Please note these may vary from year to year.  
  
  Typical year three modules   
  Core  
 
   Dissertation 
  
  
   For the dissertation, each student explores a topic of their choice under the supervision of a designated dissertation group tutor. Work on the dissertation extends over both semesters in the third year. The subject matter must be relevant to the student's Honours subject and approved by the tutor.  
   The study may be entirely based on the analysis of secondary literature; alternatively it may involve the collection and analysis of primary data, including documentary or textual data, on a scale appropriate to the work-load involved.  
   During the autumn semester, the student should identify a topic and decide on an appropriate strategy of enquiry and analysis. Initial reading and planning for the dissertation should be undertaken mostly in the autumn semester, including literature reviews. A dissertation plan is submitted by the end of November. Any empirical investigation should be substantially underway by the end of the autumn semester.  
   In the spring semester analysis of the literature and any primary material should be completed and the dissertation written up by early in the summer term.  
   The module aims to give students the opportunity to:  
   
    choose a topic of study of particular interest and relevance to themselves   
    engage in an in-depth examination of the topic making use of advanced bibliographic skills   
    where appropriate, to engage in original investigation, data collection and analysis   
    explore at a reasonably advanced level the contribution the discipline makes to an understanding of social life and social order   
    present material clearly and effectively to an audience beyond that of a specialist in the field  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Optional  
  Four optional modules which could include one module from another school. Browse the list of year three modules which the school offers. Please note, these may vary from year to year.