Modules  
  Year one contains the core modules and is taught alongside the BSc Physiotherapy students, encouraging inter-professional learning.   
  The optional modules we offer in year three are inspired by the research and clinical interests of our staff, and current sport and health and wellbeing policy. As a result, these may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of what we offer.  
  
    Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Developing Evidence-Based Practice (research) 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the principles underpinning evidence-based practice in order to develop your ability to use evidence to inform clinical decision making. You’ll be taken through the process of evidence based practice in logical sequence and over the course of the module will develop a search strategy around a clinical question, carry out a search of the literature, critique the literature and consider the application to clinical practice. Teaching includes lectures, tutorials, library sessions, directed activities and a mini conference.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Musculoskeletal Disorders, Diseases and Sports Injuries 
   
   
    You will develop your understanding of the mechanism of injury, pathology, healing and management of fractures, soft tissue injuries and rheumatological conditions in order to provide effective physiotherapeutic management. For this module you will direct teacher contact, directed study, and independent learning.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Neuromusculoskeletal Studies 
   
   
    You will develop a solid foundation of knowledge that relates to human structure, function and movement as well as basic physiotherapy assessment and treatment skills, and awareness of core physiotherapeutic concepts. The focus is on the cervical spine and upper limb, therefore the aim is for this knowledge to be specifically developed in respect of the cervical spine, shoulder, elbow, wrist and hand. You’ll have three 1-hour led lectures and six 1-hour practical sessions per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Pathophysiology 1 
   
   
    The module aims to prepare you with the underpinning knowledge of basic tissue structures, and in particular of nerve and muscle tissue, in order to be able to discuss the physiology of muscle contraction, the control of movement and the mechanisms of sensation (including pain). You will have a two hour lecture, one hour tutorial and a three 2-hour laboratory session per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Personal and Professional Development 1 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the development of key skills used for effective study and management of your own learning. This aims to develop self-management and facilitate your ability to integrate knowledge gained in different subject areas to assist future learning. Learning style, reflection and development of strategies to facilitate independent learning are introduced and the physiological effects of illness or injury on an individual and the family will be discussed, including quality of life. Over the course of the module, you’ll have 55 hours of directed teacher contact and independent directed learning.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  
    Emergency Sports First Aid 
   
   
   
     This module covers management of the individual in an emergency situation and care of the injured athlete. The completion of this module leads to a recognised Sports First Aid qualification.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Injury Management and Rehabilitation  
   
   
   
     This module continues the development of manual skills, massage and exercise prescription in the management and rehabilitation of the individual. These skills will often be used regularly in your career so it is important that you have adequate training and practice. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Nutrition and Exercise Physiology 
   
   
   
     This module includes learning about the energy systems for exercise and the enhancement of health and performance through manipulation of dietary intake. Methods for measuring body composition, and performance markers, will also be examined and introduced. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Personal and Professional Development 2 
   
   
   
     Continuing from the skills introduced in Year One, this module will cover management skills, teamwork, leadership, stress management and counselling. The aim of this module is to equip you with transferable and practical skills that you will need in your future career.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Prehabilitation and Screening 
   
   
   
     In this module you will cover the topics of assessment of injury risk and pre-participation screening for sport, including biomechanical analysis of human movement. The application of strategies to reduce risk of injury (prehabilitation) is also introduced in this module. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Methods and Planning 
   
   
   
     In the contemporary healthcare setting it is important to possess skills for planning and researching. This module introduces statistics and signals the start of your own project with the submission of a research proposal to assist this key development in your learning process.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  
    Community Module 
   
   
   
     This is a year-long project promoting sport, exercise and health in a community setting. This may be a charity, school or other community project. The application and development of a broad range of skills will be encouraged which may include information technology, communication, and coaching to encourage a healthier lifestyle or improved sport performance in individuals.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Personal and Professional Development 3 
   
   
   
     This module focuses on preparing you for your first job. The development of transferable skills for the sport, leisure and health environments are included. The construction of curriculum vitae, personal statements, application forms and interview skills are covered in detail during this module. Goal planning for a career in sport and exercise is included to prepare you for your future. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Dissertation Project 
   
   
   
     Every student will undertake a project in year three. This may be a laboratory-based investigation, an educational development or a literature review. A choice of topics will be available and a staff supervisor will be allocated to you to guide you through the process. The project allows you to demonstrate your ability to undertake and complete a substantial piece of work. This requires good time management and organisational skills to be used. Students who submit work of a sufficient quality will be encouraged post-graduation to present it at conference or be published.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
   Optional 
   
   
    
   
  
    There are a number of optional modules available to allow you to specialise in specific areas that interest you.
    
    Typical optional modules include: 
   
   
    
   
  
    • Advanced Soft Tissue Techniques 
   
  
    • Business Management 
   
  
    • Exercise and Sport in Special Populations (two tied modules) 
   
  
    • Health and Wellbeing 
   
  
    • Psychology in Sport 
   
   
    
   
  
 
     
  
     
  More information on all the modules can be obtained by contacting the School directly.