Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
  Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Great Religious Texts 1 
   
   
    In this unique module you’ll read and discuss a wide range of important religious works including scriptural, philosophical, theological, and mystical texts. The aim is to explore the scope of the discipline of theology and religious studies and become familiar with a range of central questions as well as the processes of debate and critique. You’ll study primary texts from the Bible, the Qur’an and the Bhagavad-Gita as well as extracts from the work of Plato, Augustine, Anselm and Julian of Norwich, among others. Teaching is carried out through weekly seminar discussions led by your tutor for the module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Great Religious Texts 2 
   
   
    This module follows on from Great Religious Texts 1 and gives you the opportunity to continue to read and discuss a wide range of important religious works including scriptural, philosophical, theological, and mystical texts. The aim is to explore the scope of the discipline of theology and religious studies and become familiar with a range of central questions as well as the processes of debate and critique. You will study works by Kierkegaard, Nietzsche and other well-known figures, and texts ranging from 17th century Sikh hymns through to the Kairos document of 20th century apartheid South Africa. Teaching is carried out through weekly seminar discussions led by your tutor for the module.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Canon to Creation: History, Literature and Theology of the Hebrew Bible  
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the literature, history and interpretation of the Hebrew Bible, also known as the Old Testament. You’ll consider the biblical text as history, literature and scripture in both the Jewish and Christian Traditions. For this module you’ll have a two-hour lecture each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Introduction to the Study of the New Testament   
   
   
    In this module you’ll gain an overview of the texts that makes up the New Testament and cover central methods, topics and issues in studying them including: the formation of the New Testament canon; the Roman, Greek and Jewish background to the New Testament; the development of historical criticism of the Synoptic Gospels; the historicity of the Synoptic Gospels and Acts, and the authenticity of Paul’s letters. You’ll have a total of three hours of lectures each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Christian Thought and Culture to 1600 
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn about the lives and works of some of the main theologians ranging from the first Christian thinker in the 2nd century, up to the Reformation and Counter-Reformation movements of the 16th century. You’ll study figures such as Augustine, Aquinas and Luther, looking at their ideas but also placing them in their broader historical and ecclesiastical context. For this module you’ll have a combination of two hours of lectures and a one hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Theology and Ethics in the Modern World 
   
   
    This module introduces the development of Western Christian theology from the Enlightenment to the present. It surveys the challenges posed to Christian faith by modernity and a range of theological responses to these challenges. In this way you’ll deal with central theological and ethical questions arising in the work and historical context of key thinkers such as Descartes, Kant, Schleiermacher, Kierkegaard and Barth. You’ll be taught through two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy for Theologians 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be given an overview of the most important philosophical ideas, theories and arguments and their relation to religion and theology.  You’ll begin by studying the Greek ‘natural theology’ of the pre-Socratic thinkers and end with the postmodern ‘turn to religion’ of Emmanuel Levinas and Jacques Derrida. For this module you’ll be taught through a combination of two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Islam 
   
   
    This module examines the narrative and textual foundations of the Islamic tradition including the Qur'an, the prophetic tradition and the life of the Prophet Muhammad. You’ll also look at the development and structure of Islamic society, law, doctrine and spirituality through the classical period, and Muslim responses to challenges posed by modernity including questions of gender and the nation state. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Judaism 
   
   
    This module introduces Judaism from the beginnings of its formation to modernity. You’ll study major texts from the Second Temple period and Late Antique Judaism, the major developments of medieval Jewish culture under Islamic and Christian rule, and key topics in early modern and contemporary Judaism. There will be an emphasis on textual strategies of Jewish readings of the Bible and the Bible’s importance as a central religious symbol, particularly in terms of the foundation of the state of Israel. For this module you’ll have a lecture and a seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
     Optional  
  
    The Buddhist Tradition 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the origins, history, principal forms, teachings and practices of the Buddhist tradition. You’ll read extracts from key scriptures, and explore developments in the tradition of Buddhist thought. You’ll spend two hours each week in lectures, examining the historical progress of Buddhism through India, China, and into modernity and the West.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Bible in Music, Art and Literature 
   
   
    The Bible is one of the bestsellers and its influence on Western culture is unparalleled. This module explores the way in which the Bible is drawn upon in art, music and literature ranging from Jewish synagogue mosaics and early Christian iconography, to contemporary secular films and music. You’ll be encouraged to engage with case studies of works of art and critically consider the way in which art, music and literature function as biblical interpretations. You’ll have a two-hour lecture each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biblical Greek 1 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the Greek language as used in the New Testament. You’ll gain the ability to understand and translate basic sentences into English by the end of the module. The module is taught through four hours of classes each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biblical Hebrew 1 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the basics of reading Biblical Hebrew. You’ll gain the ability to understand and translate basic sentences into English by the end of the module. You’ll have four hours per week of classes for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Explaining Religion 
   
   
    This module surveys influential modern conceptions of religion and critically examines the theories of knowledge, interpretation, society and culture associated with them. It seeks to address forms of reductionism in the study of religion and to assess the role of religion in various aspects of society and culture. Among the approaches you’ll consider are neurology and evolutionary theories, Augustinian theology and Enlightenment scepticism, sociology, economics and Marxism. You’ll have a weekly two-hour lecture for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Presentations: Great Religious Debates 
   
   
    Great Religious Debates is part of a pathway - together with Great Religious Texts in the first year and the dissertation in the third year – that is intended to help you to develop your independent study skills and a range of transferable skills. Great Religious Debates develops the theological themes of the seminar-based Great Religious Texts module and is assessed by a presentation relating to one of the texts studied in the earlier module. You will have a weekly two-hour seminar for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    Dissertation 
   
   
    You will research and write a dissertation on a subject and title selected in consultation with academic staff in the department. You’ll also give a presentation on your research in progress during the course of the spring semester. The presentation will help you to crystallise your ideas and gain a clearer idea of the overall shape of your work in order to help with the writing process and to continue the development of important transferable skills. You will have regular dissertation tutorials with your supervisor, and will attend dissertation presentations during the Spring Semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Optional Modules   
  
  
   Optional modules in years 2 and 3 may be taken from the wide range on offer in the department. These include modules in the areas of philosophy of religion and ethics, biblical studies, religious history, Christian theology and culture, Islam and Judaism:  
   Year 2 & 3  
  
    The Philosophy of Religion 
   
   
    In this module you’ll explore significant problems in the philosophy of religion, such as the credibility of the existence of God, the relation between religion and science, the relation between religion and morality, the problem of evil, and the possibility of an after-life. There will also be discussion of significant themes such as the nature of being, of faith, of religious experience, of religious language, and of religious love. You will consider significant thinkers including Plato, Anselm, Aquinas, Hume, Kant, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Freud and Weil. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Money, Sex and Power: Religion and Critical Theory  
   
   
    This module explore the central questions such as ‘What is religion for?,’ ‘What interests does it serve?,’ and ‘Whether or not religion is 'true', may it be suspected of producing an illusory view of itself?’ You will be introduced to and explore three critical worldviews and their critiques of established religion: psychoanalysis (religion as wish-fulfilment); Marxian critical theory (religion as ideology); and Nietzschean scepticism (religion as will to power). You will examine the view of modern critical theories of religion that it is the drive of money, sex and power which govern the shape of life, and provide a framework for understanding all experience, including pre-eminently that of religion. You’ll have a two hour lecture each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Spirit of Utopia: Critical Theory, Politics and Religion  
   
   
    In this module you’ll trace the development of Critical Theory from its beginnings in the original Frankfurt School, through its American offspring and its German continuation (Habermas, Honneth, Sloterdijk), up to its influence on French deconstruction (Derrida). The name of the module derives from the early work of Ernst Bloch, The Spirit of Utopia, which for the first time fused Marxist and Freudian ‘theories of suspicion’ with the Messianic idiom. You will explore the way that Critical Theory, far from being ‘atheistic,’ is, in fact, deeply influenced by a certain form of religious narrative deriving mostly from the sources of Jewish Messianism. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Atheism 
   
   
    This module will investigate the phenomenon of ‘new atheism’ and place it in a broader historical and intellectual context. Where does it come from? What are the sources and roots of contemporary atheism? How can we explain the transition in Western society from belief as norm to agnosticism or atheism as the majority position? What are the most convincing arguments for atheism, and what are its most radical and interesting versions? The module will include examination of recent writers (e.g. Dawkins, Dennett, Hitchens), atheists of the Enlightenment, and thinkers such as Nietzsche and Feuerbach. Secularization and various ways in which scholars have tried to understand it will be explored, as will atheism in the Middle East and atheism in Indian thought. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Body and Soul: Christian Theological Anthropology 
   
   
    This module examines Christian theological understandings of the human person. It begins by exploring the Hebrew scriptures and ancient Greek philosophy in relation to the nature of the soul, the importance of the body and gender. Of central importance is a theological anthropology focused on the imago dei. The module will progress to the study of Christ as the true human and the mediaeval concept of the human person as a microcosm of the cosmos. The latter stages of the module will focus on theological anthropology in the context of modern philosophical anthropologies, modernity's focus on 'mind' and 'consciousness' in the understanding of the human person, and contemporary ethical issues surrounding human 'enhancement' via medical technologies. You’ll have two hours of lectures each week and a seminar every other week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Creation 
   
   
    It is a fundamental claim of the Jewish, Christian and Islamic traditions that the universe is not an accident or a brute fact; it is created. In this module we will examine the background to the Christian doctrine of creation in the Hebrew scriptures and ancient Greek philosophy, and explore the concept of causation and divine action within creation. Taking an historical perspective, the module will investigate: the development of the Christian doctrine of creation; the advent of natural science and its theological roots and implications (considering figures such as Galileo and Newton); the effect of the Reformation on our understanding of humanity's relation to the natural world; the rise of 'intelligent design'; and the origins of the environmental crisis. This module will involve a unique mix of scriptural study, philosophy and the history of science and theology and you’ll be taught through three hours of seminars and lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Darwinism 
   
   
    What is Darwinism? Is it metaphysics, a philosophy, or ‘merely’ science. Does it entail atheism? Could it even accommodate theism? This module will explore Darwin’s theory of evolution, outlining its historical development up to the present day and considering the various debates that shaped its formation. You’ll explore the theory’s application in terms of Social-Darwinism, Sociobiology, and Evolutionary Psychology and the consequences this might have for our own self-understanding, and for how we interpret the world. The module is taught by Conor Cunningham, whose recent book Darwin’s Pious Idea and BBC documentary on the topic have ignited much debate. You’ll have two hours of lectures and an one-hour seminar each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Love and Death 
   
   
    In this module you’ll engage in a philosophical exploration of the diversity of ways that love and death have been understood in the Western tradition and have been used to give meaning and significance to human life. Starting with the foundations of Plato’s Phaedrus and Apology you will explore issues such as: how morality makes moral action meaningful, whether dying for others is a model of love, whether erotic love and charity are essentially different, and whether human aspiration is driven by anticipation or fear of death. You will encounter elements of Christian theology, philosophy, psychoanalysis and existentialism in the module. You’ll have a combination of two hours of lectures and a one-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Problems of Religious Diversity 
   
   
    Does faith in one religion require the rejection of all others? This module presents you with the opportunity to bring together the diverse things you have learned about religion and to formulate and clarify your own viewpoint. It will provide an opportunity to explore ways of dealing with the variety of commitments to an ultimate viewpoint in the contemporary world. Approaches to other faiths from Christian theology, philosophy, and mysticism will be explored, as well as approaches from other faiths. Attempts to unify world religions will be examined alongside attempts to retain their differences, as well as causes of deep underlying conflicts between faiths. You’ll be taught through a two-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Justice 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the history of the main philosophical and theological theories of justice, up to the present day. You’ll focus on a critical assessment of the truth and viability of these theories and the way in which the theme of justice forms a crucial intersection between ethical and political philosophy. You’ll have three hours of seminars each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Theological Ethics: Theory and Practice 
   
   
    This module introduces students to the origins of Christian moral theology in ancient Greek and patristic thought before examining various traditions of theological reflection on the nature of the good life: Biblical ethics, virtue, natural law and divine command. We will also explore the nature of the Church as a moral community orientated towards the good. Against this background, theological approaches to the ethics of medicine, war and political justice will be examined.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Prophets and Prophecy in the Hebrew Bible 
   
   
    In this module you’ll examine the prophetic literature of the Hebrew Bible, considering the nature of prophecy in the Hebrew Bible and in the wider ancient Near Eastern context. You’ll examine biblical prophetic texts as literature such as: Amos, Hosea, Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel as well as the narratives about the prophets in the Pentateuch/Torah, historical books, and Latter Prophets. For this module you’ll have a one-hour lecture and two-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Sex, Violence and God: Ethics in the Hebrew Bible 
   
   
    This module will examine a range of ethical issues in the Hebrew Bible, considering the nature of ethical thought in ancient Israel and its relationship to surrounding ideas in the Ancient Near East, as well as the ongoing use of these texts as a moral resource right up to the present day. Topics for specific study include those such as the justification of violence and warfare, sexuality and gender issues, and ideas of social justice. The module is taught through a two-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Archaeological Excavation: Tel Azekah, Israel 
   
   
    This unique module involves spending four weeks working on an archaeological dig at the biblical site of Tel Azekah, Israel. Assessment for the module is based on participating in field school courses on site as well as an essay and portfolio and the area supervisor's assessment of the student's fieldwork and understanding of the archaeological excavations. Studying this module will not only give you an insight into the way in which archaeology informs study of the Bible, but also into the historical and geographical context of Israel. You will also have plenty of opportunity to experience the variety of modern day Israel including tours of significant locations.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Life and Teaching of Jesus 
   
   
    This module provides a historical and theological introduction to the life and work of Jesus. It will involve a critical evaluation of the relevant sources for Jesus’ life, and discussion of the related question of faith and history (the tension between the Jesus of faith and the historical Jesus). Consequently the life of Jesus and his basic teaching will be considered with respect to the different perspectives visible in the New Testament itself. The focus will be upon on the Synoptic Gospels (Mark, Luke, Matthew), though the other sources will not be neglected. You will explore central issues such as the messianic identity and role of Jesus, his teaching and mission, and the reasons for his death. This module is taught through one two hour lecture, and one seminar per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Gospel of Matthew 
   
   
    This module interprets key parts of Matthew’s Gospel and engages with aspects of its impact in theology and the life of the church, as well as the historicity of the narrated events. The influence and importance of the Gospel of Matthew from the second century to the twenty-first cannot be overestimated. It was used as a main source for Christian beliefs and ethics, with famous texts including the Lord's Prayer, the Sermon on the Mount, the parable of the last judgment, and the Great Commission. These texts, which in their Matthean version influenced Christianity for good or ill to a large degree, will be explored in the context of this module so that you will not only develop your understanding of this key formative text for Western civilisation, but also the skills needed to analyse it. The module is taught through a weekly two hour lecture.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Following Jesus: Identity, Discipleship and Community in Early Christianity 
   
   
    In this module you will focus on five early church documents (1 Thessalonians; The Didache; Mark’s Gospel; 1 Clement; and 1 Peter) to identify the varying patterns that emerged in early churches with regard to a) their identity as followers of Jesus; b) their understanding of the nature of discipleship; and c) their understanding of themselves as a specific community within history. The module is taught through a two hour lecture and a seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Jewish Context of Jesus and Early Christianity  
   
   
    This module deals with the Jewish context of Jesus and the Early Christians. It contains an introduction to Jewish history and its sources from the time of Alexander the Great (356-323 BCE) to the last revolt of the Jewish people against Roman rule in 132-135 CE. Besides written sources the political geography and some important archeological finds and excavations will be treated to help gain an understanding of the social and religious history. The second part of the module deals in particular with the Pharisees, who had become the most powerful and influential religious movement within Judaism by the time of Jesus and the Early Church. The module is taught through a two hour lecture and a seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Theology of Paul 
   
   
    In this module you’ll focus on the theology of Paul as found in the seven letters which are generally accepted as genuine among critical scholars. Central themes such as reconciliation, justification, grace, faith, baptism, ecclesiology and eschatology will be explored. You’ll be taught through three hours of lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    What Does God Expect? New Testament Ethics 
   
   
    This module will examine a range of ethical issues in the New Testament and their theological foundation. You will discuss the Jewish heritage and context of these issues as well as the idea of universal ethical standards that apply to all humanity. Topics covered in this module include: the expected behaviour in relation to the divine (e.g. worship, sacrifice, purity); personal ethics (e.g. identity, love of self, martyrdom); ethical relationships (e.g. love of family and neighbour); sexual issues, economic and social issues (e.g. caring for the poor); and political ethics (e.g. relationship to the state and pagan rulers). For this module you’ll have three hours of lectures each week.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Elements of Biblical Theology 
   
   
    Biblical Theology' as understood in this module is a theological concept based on the conviction that the same one God, the God of Israel and the father of Jesus Christ, is the main content and focus of the Christian Scriptures comprising the Old and New Testament. The first part of the module will attempt to justify this understanding of a Biblical Theology both in dialogue with other understandings of Biblical Theology as well as those in opposition to it. The second part of the module will present a number of Biblical topics (e.g. the question of revelation; the Law; the Messiah; the covenant(s); the Spirit of God) and consider their function within a Biblical Theology. The module is taught through a two hour lecture and a seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biblical Greek 1 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the Greek language as used in the New Testament. You’ll gain the ability to understand and translate basic sentences into English by the end of the module. The module is taught through four hours of classes each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biblical Hebrew 1  
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the basics of reading Biblical Hebrew. You’ll gain the ability to understand and translate basic sentences into English by the end of the module. You’ll have four hours per week of classes for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Biblical Language Studies 
   
   
    This module builds on the year 1 introductory biblical language modules (i.e. Biblical Greek 1 and 2 or Biblical Hebrew 1 and 2) and aims to develop your ability to handle the biblical text in its original languages. The basis of the module is the study and translation of individual texts with analysis of vocabulary, grammar and style. By the end of the module you’ll be able to read and produce a detailed exegesis of a range of biblical texts in their original language. For this module you’ll two 1-hour seminars per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Literature and Religion 
   
   
    In this module you’ll first be introduced to the literary genres of the Bible, primarily poetry, myth, parable and gospel narrative. In addition you’ll engage in a historical survey of the way in which a wide range of literary texts engage in religious thought and the way they ‘perform’ or ‘do’ theology. Texts include: Dante’s Commedia, Milton’s Paradise Lost, Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress and Bront&euml;’s Jane Eyre. This module will be taught through three hours of lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Religion and Fantasy 
   
   
    This module offers an investigation into the rise of the fantasy genre at the precise point at which religion in the western world was challenged by the rise of rationalism, materialism and historical criticism. You’ll analyse a range of literary fantasies and fantastic tales as apologies, theodicies or critiques that seek to address these challenges. Authors studied include George MacDonald, G. K. Chesterton, Charles Williams, J.R.R. Tolkien's and C.S. Lewis. You’ll have three hours of seminars each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Virtue Ethics and Fantasy 
   
   
    In this module you’ll be introduced to virtue ethics as an ancient form of moral practice, which has come back into prominence in recent years. Virtue ethics emphasises the lived experience of a tradition and is therefore narrative in character, offering itself naturally to literary embodiment. You’ll study key ancient Greek texts of the virtue tradition including Aristotle's Nichomachaen Ethics as well as works by Theophrastus, Cicero, Aquinas and contemporary reconstruals of the virtue tradition by Alasdair MacIntyre and Stanley Hauerwas. Virtue ethics will then be analysed in literary texts, such as Homer's Iliad, the medieval poem, Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Jane Austen's Mansfield Park and Graham Green's Brighton Rock. You’ll have a one-hour lecture as well as two hours of seminars every week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Bible in Music, Art and Literature 
   
   
    The Bible is one of the bestsellers and its influence on Western culture is unparalleled. This module explores the way in which the Bible is drawn upon in art, music and literature ranging from Jewish synagogue mosaics and early Christian iconography, to contemporary secular films and music. You’ll be encouraged to engage with case studies of works of art and critically consider the way in which art, music and literature function as biblical interpretations. You’ll have a two-hour lecture each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Doing Theology with Richard Wagner 
   
   
    This unique module involves the study of Wagner’s last stage work, Parsifal. You’ll investigate Wagner’s career, looking at his intellectual, artistic, philosophical, and religious development in its historical context. Topics studied will include: how the main characters of Parsifal encounter Christ; themes of Christology, atonement, predestination, free will, conversion, and the eucharist in the work; Wagner’s relationship to Judaism and the Jewish people; and Parsifal and ‘regeneration’. For this module you will have three hours of seminars each week.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Eastern Orthodox Christianity in the Modern World 
   
   
    In this module you will be introduced to the history, theology, and practices of Eastern Orthodox Churches. The history of Orthodox Christianity in the medieval, early modern and contemporary eras will be covered as well as contemporary issues affecting the Orthodox Churches including the relationship between Church and state, the relationship with neighbouring faiths or ideologies, the role of mission, the ordination of women, and teaching on ethical issues.  Special attention will be given to ‘practices’ such as liturgy, asceticism and rituals such as the veneration of holy relics and icons. You’ll be taught through a three-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Eucharist: An Historical Approach 
   
   
    The Eucharist has been known by many names over its history: the ‘Eucharist’, the ‘Agape’, the ‘Divine Liturgy’, the ‘Mass’, the ‘Lord’s Supper’ and ‘Holy Communion’. The variety of names suggests not only its significance for Christians but also the diverse ways in which it has been understood over the past two millennia. In this module you’ll discuss topics such as the practice and development of the Eucharist as well as central disputes and contemporary issues relating to it. For this module you’ll have a one-hour lecture and seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Darkness and Light: Medieval Mysticism  
   
   
    In this module you will examine the tradition of medieval Christian mysticism from John Scotus Eriugena (810-877) to St. John of the Cross (1542-1591). In addition, a range of other European mystical theologians will be studied including Hildegard of Bingen (1098 - 1179), Hugh of St. Victor (d. 1141), and Julian of Norwich (1375 - 1416). An emphasis is placed on the nature of Christian apophaticism, the metaphors of illumination and darkness, theological anthropology, the character of theology as a discipline of spiritual practice, and the place of the mystical tradition within theology. For this module you’ll have two hours of seminars per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Holy People and Places in the Early Christian World 
   
   
    This module covers early Christian views of sanctity, including discipleship of Jesus, prophecy, martyrdom, and asceticism. You’ll explore the pagan and Jewish roots for these concepts, and assess their interpretation in a Christian context, and provide insight into the development of the early Church. Issues such as authority, gender, dualism, and mysticism will be discussed in the context of the complex historical and pluralist, multi-cultural background of the later Roman Empire. You will be taught through a weekly one-hour lecture and two-hour seminar.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Religion in Nineteenth Century Britain 
   
   
    In this module you’ll explore nineteenth-century religious life and thought in Britain – a period that is often regarded as the last great age of Christian faith, and when Britain was at its height as a world power. You’ll gain an informed understanding of the world from which Christianity in contemporary Britain emerged and cover topics including the concept of church reform, the dynamics of the major Christian denominations, the expansion of the Jewish community, revivalism, worship, church buildings, missions, and education. Teaching is carried out through two hours of lectures and a seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Religion in Twentieth Century Britain 
   
   
    This module investigates religious life and thought in Britain over the course of the 20th Century allowing you to understand further the immediate context of religion in contemporary Britain. Topics covered include: the transition from the Victorian to the modern age; the birth of ecumenism; the impact of the two World Wars on religion; the Second Vatican Council, the secularisation debate, the growth of multiculturalism, the church-state relationship. The module addresses the changing fortunes of the established Churches, the Free Churches and Roman Catholicism, and the patterns of growth of other world religions. You’ll be taught through one 2-hour lecture and a 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Rabbinic Judaism  
   
   
    This modules introduces Rabbinic Judaism in its formative period during Late Antiquity, and particularly its growth from the time of the destruction of the Jerusalem Temple in the first century CE. You’ll study the main texts of Rabbinic Judaism, the Mishna and its Talmudic commentary, as well as Rabbinic approaches to the Bible as expressed in the Midrash.  You’ll also be given an overview of the rabbis’ historical and cultural ties to earlier forms of Israelite religions, and assess their role in defining Judaism. Emphasis will be placed on the literary and legal strategies the rabbis employed to respond to the world around them, and attitudes toward Roman and Persian religions such as Christianity, Zoroastrianism, and Islam. For this module you’ll have a one-hour lecture and a two-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Jewish Theology and Philosophy: From Philo to Levinas 
   
   
    The module provides an overview of the most important theological and philosophical ideas, theories and arguments that Jewish thought developed from the Hellenistic period of Philo of Alexandria to the postmodern times of Emmanuel Levinas. The method of instruction will combine historical and speculative approaches, using the perspective of the 'history of ideas'. You’ll have three hours of teaching each week for this module, delivered through a combination of lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Christian-Muslim Relations 
   
   
    This module will examine the history of Christian-Muslim relationships from the rise of Islam to the present. After a brief overview of Christianity in the Middle East before the coming of Islam, we will focus on the Prophet Muhammad's encounters with Christians, the teaching of the Qur'an about Christianity, early Christian and Muslim writings about the other, and how Christians fared under Muslim rule. Following this, we will turn westward to study medieval European perceptions of Islam, the Crusades and early Catholic mission efforts among Muslims. The latter part of the module will discuss Muslim-Christian debates in the modern period, the spectrum of contemporary Muslim perceptions of Christianity, and recent efforts in Christian-Muslim dialogue. Case studies of Muslim-Christian relations in Africa and other regions may also be considered. You’ll have a two-hour lecture each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Islamic Theology and Philosophy 
   
   
    This module examines how Muslims have addressed fundamental theological and philosophical questions relating to their faith. These questions concern the foundations of religious knowledge and authority, God's unity and attributes, God's relationship to the world, divine determinism and human freedom, prophecy, and eschatology. The module proceeds historically, beginning with early Muslim theological views and moving on to major philosophical developments in the medieval period that continue to frame much Islamic theological thinking today. You’ll have a two-hour lecture and a one-hour seminar each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Ibn Taymiyya: Jihadist or Theologian? 
   
   
    Ibn Taymiyya was one of the foremost Muslim scholars of the medieval period, and he is well known today for inspiring movements ranging from violent extremism to Salafism and reformist modernism. Ibn Taymiyya campaigned for jihad against the Mongol invaders of Syria, and he landed in jail several times for challenging the religious and political status quo. He also wrote prolifically on law, theology, philosophy, spirituality, Christianity and Shi‘ism in an attempt to reform and commend the Islamic religion. This module examines Ibn Taymiyya’s life and thought and trace his legacy to the present, and it will ask how he is best characterised: as a jihadist, a theologian, or perhaps something else. You’ll have two hours of lectures and a one-hour seminar each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Hindu Tradition 
   
   
    This module investigates the following aspects of the Hindu tradition: its Vedic and pre-Vedic origins; Hindu scriptures and the role of scripture; philosophy and Yoga teachings; gods and goddesses; devotion to Vishnu and Krishna; devotion to Shiva and the Goddess; temples and temple worship; the caste system; modern trends in Hinduism. You’ll have two hours of lectures and a one-hour seminar each week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Buddhist Tradition 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the origins, history, principal forms, teachings and practices of the Buddhist tradition. You’ll read extracts from key scriptures, and explore developments in the tradition of Buddhist thought. You’ll spend two hours each week in lectures, examining the historical progress of Buddhism through India, China, and into modernity and the West.