Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   
    Essential Molecules, Genes and Cells (40 credits)  
   
   
    This module combines lectures and laboratory classes and aims to introduce you to the structure and function of significant molecules in cells, and the important metabolic processes which occur inside them. You will study, amongst other topics, protein and enzyme structure and function, the biosynthesis of cell components, and the role of cell membranes in barrier and transport processes. You'll examine how information in DNA is used to determine the structure of gene products. Topics include DNA structure, transcription and translation and mutation and recombinant DNA technology.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Essential Skills in Tropical Sciences (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module focuses on developing the core skills needed by tropical scientists in scientific writing, data handling and analysis, experimental design and scientific presentations. Alongside lectures and workshops, small-group tutorials are an important component of this module. In these tutorials, you get to know the member of staff who will be your tutor for the duration of your studies, discuss scientific topics relevant to your degree, and practice key skills such as essay-writing and data-handling.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Life on Earth (20 credits)  
   
   
    Life on Earth provides an introduction to the fundamental characteristics and properties of the myriad of organisms which inhabit our planet, from viruses, bacteria and Archaea, to plants and animals. In weekly lectures, and regular laboratory practical classes, you will consider how living organisms are classified, how they are related genetically and phylogenetically, and basic aspects of their structure and function.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Evolution, Ecology and Behaviour (20 credits)  
   
   
    Starting with Darwin’s theory of evolution, you will learn how natural selection and other evolutionary forces have shaped the ways in which organisms interact with each other and their environment. In addition to lectures, practical classes will give you hands on experience with a range of ecological and behavioural concepts in the laboratory and the field.  
   
  
      
   
      
   Optional Modules (20 credits)   
   You also choose 20 credits of optional modules from the School of Life Sciences or from other Schools in the University. Options from within the School of Life Sciences are as follows:  
   
    Physiology (20 credits)  
   
   
    In this module, you will be introduced to the physiology of the major systems e.g. cardiovascular, nervous, musculo-skeletal mostly in man, including some aspects of drug action. This module includes lectures and laboratory classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamentals of Neuroscience (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module will give you a good grounding in the basic principles of the nervous system of humans and other animals. Topics will include neuroanatomy, cellular neuroscience, neuropharmacology, sensory systems, neuroendocrinology, memory, behavioural neuroscience and diseases of the nervous system. These will be delivered through weekly lectures and practical classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Chemistry for Life (20 credits)  
   
   
    To help you understand the chemical underpinnings of biochemistry you will study some essential chemistry in year 1 in lecture based modules which include interpretation of the periodic table, atomic properties, electron configuration, periodicity, structure and bonding, symmetry, coordination complexes and their properties, which underpins much of the study of chemistry. You will also develop an understanding of the basics of organic chemistry, including nomenclature, molecular structure and bonding, stereochemistry and the chemical reactivity of common functional groups and reaction types through an understanding of their electronic properties and how these are fundamental to biological reactions.  
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
  
    Ecology 
   
   
    Introduces the study of populations and communities from an evolutionary point of view, and considers critically the extent of our understanding of ecological ideas. Study for this module consists of a four-hour lecture once per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Investigating and Writing about Biology 
   
   
    You will be prepared for the challenges posed by scientific literature and the style of exam questions that you can expect in your second-year modules. This is followed by a research project into published work on a selected topic, presenting the information gained in an assessed dissertation. You will spend a total of fourteen hours within lectures and tutorials studying this module, plus nine two-three hour bioinformatics sessions in the computer laboratories.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Experimental Design and Analysis II 
   
   
    This module combines practical elements in experimental design (through forming hypotheses and testing them through practical work in Animal Behaviour) with a short lecture course outlining principles of statistical analysis. Studying for this module involves a total of seven hours of lectures, plus four three-hour practicals and a three-hour workshop of student presentations.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Rainforest Ecology Field Course 
   
   
    A residential field course in the Malaysian jungle, this module focuses on understanding rainforest community structure and function. Students will work in small groups for one week on research projects and set activities designed to give them experience of appropriate sampling techniques, and an appreciation of the ecological factors which are unique to the tropical rainforest environment.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Tropical Biodiversity Field Course 
   
   
    This one-week residential field course is based on Tioman island, off the coast of peninsular Malaysia. The course is designed to introduce students to the enormous diversity of life found in tropical environments, from coral reefs to rainforests. Students will work on a series of exercises in different environments, sampling and identifying animals and plants, and looking at the relationship between diversity and the physical environment, especially in the context of recent anthropogenic change (e.g. climate change and ocean acidification).   
   
  
      
   
   
    Principals and Analysis of Gene Function  
   
   
    You will consider the central importance of genetics in all areas of modern Biology. Students take a series of lectures and practicals throughout the year, exploring the basic properties of DNA, the ways in which genetic information is replicated and translated into proteins, and modern methods used to study gene function.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    The Project is a year-long level 3 module. You will undertake detailed research on a chosen topic after discussion with a supervisor. Each project will involve collection of data by means such as experiment, questionnaire or observation, as well as the analysis and interpretation of the data in the context of previous work.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Science and Society 
   
   
    You will examine how genetics and biotechnology are being used for the improvement of human welfare, and consider whether claims for these methods are being over-stated. The focus will be upon the underlying ethical and socio-economic issues, rather than the technology. You will have a two-hour lecture once per week during study of this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Tropical Ecosystems 
   
   
    Develops basic ecological ideas covered in second year modules such as Ecology in order to understand the global significance of tropical biodiversity to ecosystems processes and the conservation of biodiversity. Key concepts introduced in weekly one-hour lectures will be developed further in regular discussion sessions.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Tropical Parasites and Disease 
   
   
    Considers in depth the unique challenges posed by parasitic infections to human and animal health in the tropics. In a three-hour lecture session each week, students will explore the fundamental biology, treatment and epidemiology of some of the world’s most important diseases, including malaria, schistosomiasis, and trypanosomiasis.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Parasite Immunology  
   
   
    Considers immunological interactions between parasites and their hosts. Initially the mechanisms involved and the consequences of host responses/resistance to infection are reviewed across diverse taxa of parasitic organisms. You’ll discuss the strategies evolved by parasites to enable survival in the face of host immunity in some depth. You'll spend around three-hours per week in lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biological Photography and Imaging I 
   
   
    Through practical sessions, you will learn the techniques of biological image production and manipulation, including the ability to generate biological images of the highest technical quality and scientific value. You'll spend around three hours per week in lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Pathogens 
   
   
    A detailed understanding of the genetics and biochemistry behind the properties of parasites and microorganisms that cause major human diseases in the present day. You will have a three-hour lecture once per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Conservation Genetics 
   
   
    Considers the genetic effects of reduced population size, especially relating to the conservation of endangered species. You’ll study topics including genetic drift and inbreeding in depth, from theoretical and practical standpoints. You'll spend around one and a half hours per week in lectures studying this module, plus a two and a half hour computer practical.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Population Genetics 
   
   
    You’ll consider the history and practice of population genetics research, with a focus on a quantitative approach to the subject, with training in problem-solving skills. You will spend around two hours within lectures per week studying this module, plus a two-hour computer practical.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Environmental Physiology 
   
   
    Thousands of different man-made chemicals enter the environment and some are highly persistent and/or toxic. You’ll consider how organisms respond to pollution and other external stresses in general, and to different classes of toxic chemicals in particular. Several of these responses can be utilised as biomarkers, giving advance warning of possible ecological damage. The molecular actions of several pesticides are outlined, as are the mechanisms through which pesticide resistance can appear in pest populations. Finally, you’ll consider the roles of semiochemicals in signalling between pests, predators and potential food species, illustrating how these can be exploited for the purposes of eco-friendly pest management. You'll have a three-hour lecture once per week plus two three-hour practicals to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 
   
   
    Considers ion channels at the molecular level, with topics including the structure and function of different ion channel groups and their modulation by drugs, pesticides and natural toxins. You’ll also consider the synthesis and transport of neurotransmitters and the formation and release of synaptic vesicles. This module involves one three-hour session per week incorporating eight lectures and two practical sessions.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Evolution and Behaviour 
   
   
    A series of student-driven assignments, discussion groups and problem-solving workshops on evolutionary biology, with an emphasis on behaviour. You’ll consider topics such as adaptation, sex and evolution, kinship theory, communication, and human behavioural ecology. There are four hours of lectures and workshops each week in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Evolutionary Ecology 
   
   
    Considers current knowledge of, and research into, the ecological causes and evolutionary processes that govern natural selection, adaptation and microevolution in natural populations. You’ll examine three approaches to the study of evolutionary ecology: theoretical and optimality models; the comparative method; and direct measurement of natural selection in the wild. You’ll have two-to three hours of lectures each week in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Conservation 
   
   
    Considers a range of approaches to conservation biology, such as the measurement and monitoring of biodiversity, and the legal frameworks and management strategies that exist to protect it. You’ll discuss particular threats to biodiversity, such as habitat loss and invasive species. You will spend around four hours per week in lectures and have four three-hour practicals to study for this module.