Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
  
    Veterinary Musculoskeletal System 1 
   
  
    This eight-week module will give you an understanding of the structure and function of the musculoskeletal system in common domestic animals and other selected species. Through identifying key musculoskeletal structures on skeleton models, dissected specimens, radiographs, live animals and microscopy, you will gain an appreciation of the significance and clinical relevance of different structures. During an average timetabled week, you will spend around 10 hours in lectures, eight hours in practicals, six hours in self-directed study sessions and three hours in clinical relevance sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Cardiorespiratory System 1 
   
  
    This eight week module will develop your knowledge of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, including the structural and functional events of circulation and ventilation, their regulation and adaptation and the development of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems. Through this, you will be able to interpret diagnostic tests and results of physical examinations of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems. In an average timetabled week, you will spend around 10 hours in lectures, eight hours in practicals, six hours in self-directed study sessions and three hours in clinical relevance sessions. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Lymphoreticular Cell Biology 1 
   
  
    During this two week module, you will study a variety of topics including: the origin and differentiation of bone marrow cells; the process of blood clotting; the principles of blood groups and blood group testing; the origin and structure of lymphoid tissues; the principles of immunity; and the structure of DNA and synthesis of proteins. In an average timetabled week, you will spend around nine hours in lectures, eight hours in practicals, six hours in self-directed study sessions and three hours in clinical relevance sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Neuroscience 1  
   
   
   During this eight week module, you will consider the development, structure and function of the neurological system in common domestic animals and other selected species. Through considering the examination and diagnostic techniques used in the evaluation of the neurological system, you will be given an introduction to clinical neurology and the study of animal behaviour. In an average timetabled week, you will spend around 10 hours in lectures, eight hours in practicals, six hours in self-directed study sessions and three hours in clinical relevance sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Animal Health and Welfare 
   
  
    This module runs throughout your first year and provides an introduction to the health and husbandry of common species, as well as a basic understanding of UK animal industries and the role of different species in society. You will spend around three hours per week in lectures or practicals and will be introduced to some of the key animal handling and practical skills required to participate in your pre-clinical Extra Mural Studies (EMS).
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Personal and Professional Skills  
   
  
    This module runs throughout your first year and will provide you with an understanding of the basic principles of veterinary science and the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons' ‘Guide to Professional Conduct’. You will also have the opportunity to access a range of learning resources and basic computer programmes to aid your studies. During most weeks, you will typically spend around two hours in activities for completion of this module. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  
    Veterinary Gastrointestinal System 1 
   
  
    This 11 week module will develop your knowledge of the gastrointestinal system, including the liver, pancreas and peritoneum. You will study digestion, the development, regulation and adaptation of the gastrointestinal system and the formation of developmental abnormalities. Through this, you will be able to interpret diagnostic tests and results of physical examinations of the gastrointestinal system. In an average timetabled week, you will spend around nine hours in lectures, eight hours in practicals, six hours in self-directed study sessions and two hours in clinical relevance sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Endocrine & Integument Systems 1 
   
  
    This five week module will guide you through the basic anatomy, physiology and pharmacology of the endocrine and integument systems, covering aspects of histology, function and clinical dermatology. You will focus on the non-reproductive endocrine system, particularly considering the pituitary, adrenal and thyroid glands and the endocrine pancreas alongside ectoparasitology, microbiology and cytology. During an average timetabled week, you will spend around 10 hours in lectures, eight hours in practicals, six hours in self-directed study sessions and two hours in clinical relevance sessions. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Reproduction 1 
   
  
    In this six week module, you will study the reproductive system, considering male and female reproductive function, embryo/foetal and placental development, parturition and lactation. Through this, you will be able to interpret diagnostic tests and results of physical examinations of the reproductive system. In an average week, you will spend around 10 hours in lectures, eight hours in practicals, twelve hours in self-directed study sessions and four hours in clinical relevance sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Urinary System 1 
   
   
   During this three week module, you will develop your knowledge of the urinary system including its regulation, the structure and function of water and electrolyte balance and homeostasis. You will also look at the development and clinical evaluation of the urinary system. On average, you will spend around 10 hours in lectures, eight hours in practicals, six hours in self-directed study sessions and two hours in clinical relevance sessions each week. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Animal Health and Welfare 2 
   
  
    Running throughout your second year, you will further develop your expertise in the health and husbandry of common species, particularly in the areas of reproduction and nutrition. You will also be given an introduction to welfare science, ethics and law, and will consider the interactions between animal housing, husbandry and disease. Lectures and/or practicals will be delivered flexibly within an overall duration of four hours per week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Personal and Professional Skills 2 
   
  
    This year-long module will give you an understanding of the basic principles of veterinary science, including history taking and diagnostic imaging. You will also consider the application of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons' ‘Guide to Professional Conduct’, examining key areas such as ethics and confidentiality. During most weeks, you will typically spend around two hours in activities.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  
    Veterinary Research Project 
   
  
    This 12 week module gives you the opportunity to experience research methods by designing a research programme and performing experiments, surveys or other research activities aimed at solving a specific veterinary problem. You will collect, analyse and interpret data, read and collate information relevant to your study and write a clear and concise report. You will be assigned your own supervisor who will guide you throughout the development of your project and will be available to meet you for discussion. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Practical Techniques  
   
   
    During this four week module, you will be given an introduction to the practical techniques important in carrying out veterinary surgery and anaesthesia, diagnostic imaging, fertility investigations and pregnancy diagnosis. In an average week you will spend around 10 hours in lectures, 20 hours in practicals and two hours in self-directed study sessions.   
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Principles of Clinical Veterinary Science 
   
  
    This six week module introduces you to a variety of topics including: the principles of pathology; the principles of microbiology; the principles of parasitology; the principles of pharmacology and the principles of immunology. During a typical week studying this module, you will spend around nine hours in lectures, ten hours in practicals, seven hours in self-directed study sessions and two hours in clinical relevance sessions. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Personal and Professional Skills 3 
   
  
    During this six week module, you will be introduced to a variety of topics including: clinical case planning; communication and the human animal bond; skills in dealing with bereavement; and practice in giving information and advice to clients. During most weeks, you will typically spend around four hours in small groups sessions with a range of external lecturers.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules   
  
  
  
    Veterinary Cardiorespiratory System 2 
   
  
    This five week module will give you an understanding of the mechanisms of disease and will enable you to select the most appropriate diagnostic tests and therapies for animals presenting with cardiorespiratory disease. During an average week for this module, you will spend around eight hours in lectures, six hours in practicals and seven hours in self-directed study sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Endocrine and Integument Systems 2 
   
  
    During this four week module, you will cover the causes, symptoms, diagnosis and management of diseases of the endocrine and integument systems in the common domesticated species, with particular reference to diseases of the pituitary, adrenal, thyroid and parathyroid glands and the endocrine pancreas. You will also discuss causes, symptoms, diagnosis and management of diseases of the skin and related structures such as hair, hoof, horn and claw in the common domesticated species. In an average week, you will spend around 10 hours in lectures, six hours in practicals, six hours in self-directed study sessions and two hours in clinical relevance sessions. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Gastrointestinal System 2 
   
  
    During this six week module, you’ll be given an understanding of the mechanisms of disease, develop the ability to select the most appropriate diagnostic tests and identify suitable therapies for animals presenting with gastrointestinal disease. In an average week, you will spend around 11 hours in lectures, six hours in practicals and six hours in self-directed study sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Lymphoreticular Cell Biology 2 
   
  
    In this one week module you will consider the aetiology and pathology of diseases of the lymphoreticular and haemopoetic systems including symptoms, diagnosis, treatment and management of diseases which can affect the bone marrow, blood and lymphoid systems. During an average week, you will spend around 14 hours in lectures, four hours in practicals and five hours in self-directed study sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Musculoskeletal System 2 
   
  
    During this five week module, you will be given an understanding of the aetiology and pathology of diseases of the musculoskeletal system and the ability to identify symptoms, diagnose disease and identify the most appropriate treatments. In an average week, you’ll spend around 11 hours in lectures, six hours in practicals and six hours in self-directed study sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Neuroscience 2 
   
  
    In this 3 week module, you’ll discuss the causes, symptoms, diagnosis and management of diseases of the neurological system in the common domesticated species. On average, you will spend around 11 hours in lectures, six hours in practicals and six hours in self-directed study sessions during a typical week. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Reproduction 2 
   
  
    Through this five week module, you will develop the ability to diagnose and treat disorders of the male and female reproductive systems, along with the complications arising during pregnancy in a variety of common species. You will understand the mechanisms of diseases and reproductive disorders, select the most appropriate diagnostic tests and identify suitable therapies for affected animals. In an average week, you will spend around nine hours in lectures, eight hours in practicals and five hours in self-directed study sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Urinary System 2 
   
  
    This two week module will provide you with an understanding of the mechanisms of disease, the most appropriate diagnostic tests and suitable therapies for animals presenting with urinary tract diseases. On average, you will spend around nine hours in lectures, four hours in practicals and 11 hours in self-directed study sessions.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Public Health 
   
   
   This year-long module will provide you with an introduction to veterinary public and animal health standards, including processes and issues surrounding animal foodstuffs, transmittable and notifiable diseases and animal welfare. Lectures, practicals and/or self-study session will be delivered flexibly within an overall duration of four hours per week. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Personal and Professional Skills 4 
   
  
    Throughout the course of this two week long module, you will gain an understanding of a variety of topics including: veterinary working relationships; business management; business entrepreneurship; the role of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons in veterinary professional life; and veterinary career opportunities. Lectures and/or practicals will be delivered flexibly within an overall duration of two hours per week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Five Modules   
  
  
   
  
    During this lecture-free final year, you will undertake 25 weeks of rotations both in the School and with the School's Clinical Associates. Rotations are divided into three themes:  
   
   
    
   
  
    - equine  
   
   
    
   
  
    - small animal  
   
   
    
   
  
    - farm animal, veterinary public health, zoo and wildlife practice 
   
   
    
   
  
    Each of the 25 weeks comprises 32 hours contact time and is scheduled locally at Clinical Associates and within the School. 
   
      
   
    Veterinary Clinical Practice (Equine)  
   
  
    You will undertake your equine clinical practice at the following sites: 
    
     
    
   
     - Oakham Equine Veterinary Hospital (four weeks) 
    
    
     
    
   
     -Scarsdale Equine practice (two weeks) 
    
    
     
    
   
     You will apply and develop the clinical knowledge and skills you have learnt in years one to four of the course, ensuring that you meet competencies required by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. 
     
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Clinical Practice (Small Animal) 
   
  
    You will undertake your small animal clinical practice at the following sites: 
    
     
    
   
     -Dick White Referrals (two weeks) 
    
    
     
    
   
     -PDSA Small Animal practice (two weeks) 
    
    
     
    
   
     -Pride Veterinary Centre (four weeks) 
    
    
     
    
   
     You will apply and develop the clinical knowledge and skills you have learnt in years one to four of the course, ensuring that you meet competencies required by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. 
     
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Clinical Practice (Farm Animal, Veterinary Public Health, Zoo and Wildlife Practice) 
   
   
    You will undertake your farm animal, veterinary public health, zoo and wildlife practice at the following sites:  -Scarsdale farm animal practice (two weeks) 
    
     
    
   
     -Scarsdale farm skills (two weeks) 
    
    
     
    
   
     -School of Veterinary Medicine and Science herd health (two weeks) 
    
    
     
    
   
     - School of Veterinary Medicine and Science SVMS veterinary public health (two weeks) 
    
    
     
    
   
     -Twycross Zoo, wildlife and exotics (one week) 
    
    
     
    
   
     -Veterinary Laboratories Agency (pathology) and Minster poultry & game bird practice (two weeks) 
    
    
     
    
   
     You will apply and develop the clinical knowledge and skills you have learnt in years one to four of the course, ensuring that you meet competencies required by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. 
     
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Veterinary Personal and Professional Skills 
   
  
    Throughout your placements over this lecture-free final year, you’ll further develop your knowledge of a variety of topics with completion of a portfolio, including: veterinary working relationships; business management and entrepreneurship; the role of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons and the Veterinary Defence Society; and veterinary career opportunities.