Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   
    Essential Molecules, Genes and Cells (40 credits)  
   
   
    This module combines lectures and laboratory classes aims to introduce you to the structure and function of significant molecules in cells, and the important metabolic processes which occur inside them. You will study, amongst other topics, protein and enzyme structure and function, the biosynthesis of cell components, and the role of cell membranes in barrier and transport processes. You'll examine how information in DNA is used to determine the structure of gene products. Topics include DNA structure, transcription and translation and mutation and recombinant DNA technology.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Essential Skills in Zoology (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module focusses on developing the core skills needed by zoologists in scientific writing, data handling and analysis, experimental design and scientific presentations. Alongside lectures and workshops, small-group tutorials are an important component of this module. In these tutorials, you get to know the member of staff who will be your tutor for the duration of your studies, discuss scientific topics relevant to your degree, and practice key skills such as essay-writing and data-handling.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Life on Earth (20 credits)  
   
   
    Life on Earth provides an introduction to the fundamental characteristics and properties of the myriad of organisms which inhabit our planet, from viruses, bacteria and Archaea, to plants and animals. In weekly lectures, and regular laboratory practical classes, you will consider how living organisms are classified, how they are related genetically and phylogenetically, and basic aspects of their structure and function.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Evolution, Ecology and Behaviour (20 credits)  
   
   
    Starting with Darwin’s theory of evolution, you will learn how natural selection and other evolutionary forces have shaped the ways in which organisms interact with each other and their environment. In addition to lectures, practical classes will give you hands on experience with a range of ecological and behavioural concepts in the laboratory and the field.  
   
  
      
   
   
   
   
    
     Optional Modules (20 credits)  
     You also choose 20 credits of optional modules from the School of Life Sciences or from other Schools in the University. Options from within the School of Life Sciences are as follows:  
    
    
   
   
    You also choose 20 credits of optional modules from the School of Life Sciences or from other Schools in the University. Options from within the School of Life Sciences are as follows:  
    
     Physiology (20 credits)  
     Fundamentals of Neuroscience (20 credits)  
     Essential Chemistry (20 credits)  
    
   
  
      
   
   
    Physiology (20 credits)  
   
   
    In this module, you will be introduced to the physiology of the major systems e.g. cardiovascular, nervous, musculo-skeletal mostly in in man, including some aspects of drug action. This module includes lectures and laboratory classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamentals of Neuroscience (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module will give you a good grounding in the basic principles of the nervous system of humans and other animals. Topics will include neuroanatomy, cellular neuroscience, neuropharmacology, sensory systems, neuroendocrinology, memory, behavioural neuroscience and diseases of the nervous system. These will be delivered through weekly lectures and practical classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Chemistry for Life (20 credits)  
   
   
    To help you understand the chemical underpinnings of biochemistry you will study some essential chemistry in year 1 in lecture based modules which include interpretation of the periodic table, atomic properties, electron configuration, periodicity, structure and bonding, symmetry, coordination complexes and their properties), which underpins much of the study of chemistry. You will also develop an understanding of the basics of organic chemistry, including nomenclature, molecular structure and bonding, stereochemistry and the chemical reactivity of common functional groups and reaction types through an understanding of their electronic properties and how these are fundamental to biological reactions.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
  
    Evolutionary Biology of Animals 
   
   
    Introduces key evolutionary concepts and their application in the animal kingdom. Areas you’ll study include the history of evolutionary thinking, natural selection versus the neutral theory, sexual selection and human evolution. You will have a two-hour lecture once per week during this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biological Photography and Imaging I 
   
   
    Through practical sessions, you will learn the techniques of biological image production and manipulation, including the ability to generate biological images of the highest technical quality and scientific value. You'll spend around three hours per week in lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Behavioural Ecology Field Course 
   
   
    A residential field course in Portugal based on research projects in animal behaviour, ecology and parasitology, carried out in small groups. This module takes place over 15 days in the Easter vacation.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biodiversity Field Course 
   
   
    A residential field course based on research projects in field biology. You will learn about the rich variety of animals and plants that inhabit the UK, how to recognise them, how to count them and what kinds of factors affect their distributions. This module takes place in September during which you will spend one week based within the English Peak District.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Ecology 
   
   
    Introduces the study of populations and communities from an evolutionary point of view, and considers critically the extent of our understanding of ecological ideas. Study for this module consists of a four-hour lecture once per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Environmental Physiology 
   
   
    You’ll examine how animals cope with and take advantage of opportunities associated with living in different environments, with topics including animal form and function and feeding strategies. You'll have eight three-hour lectures blocks and two three-hour practicals studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Natural Systems  
   
   
    Considers the principles underlying the structure and organisation of natural systems. You’ll study topics such as diversity theory, community ecology and ecosystem functioning. You will have a three-hour lecture once per week to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Parasitology 
   
   
    You’ll consider the ecological specialisation of parasitic organisms and parasitism. Emphasis is given to understanding the survival strategies of parasites, through analysis of the costs/benefits of specific solutions to the problem of transmission between hosts. You will spend around three hours per week in lectures plus a three-hour practical studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Animal Behaviour 
   
   
    Introduces the study of animal behaviour, from the physiological and genetic bases of behaviour to its development and adaptive significance in the natural environment. You will have a three-hour lecture once per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Immunobiology 
   
   
    An introduction to vertebrate immunity, the immune response to infection and the basis of immunological disorders in humans. You will spend around three hours per week in nine weeks of lectures studying this module plus two three-hour practicals.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Investigating and Writing about Biology 
   
   
    You will be prepared for the challenges posed by scientific literature and the style of exam questions that you can expect in your second-year modules. This is followed by a research project into published work on a selected topic, presenting the information gained in an assessed dissertation. You will spend a total of fourteen hours within lectures and tutorials studying this module, plus nine two to three hour bioinformatics sessions in the computer laboratories.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Experimental Design and Analysis II 
   
   
    This module combines practical elements in experimental design (through forming hypotheses and testing them through practical work in Animal Behaviour) with a short lecture course outlining principles of statistical analysis. Studying for this module involves a total of seven hours of lectures, plus four three-hour practicals and a three-hour workshop of student presentations.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular and Developmental Neurobiology  
   
   
    You’ll consider how the brain develops and connects, how the connections work, are maintained and repaired, how information is stored in the form of memory, and how our knowledge of neurobiology can be applied. This module involves a three-hour lecture once per week plus a total of two three-hour practicals.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Manipulating Genes and Genomes  
   
   
    Introduces the theoretical and practical basis of genetic engineering and gene manipulation. Using examples, manipulation of genes and genomes in bacteria, yeast and animals will be studied. You'll have eight two-hour lectures and three three-hour practicals in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Developmental Biology 
   
   
    Examines the basic concepts of vertebrate embryonic development. You’ll discuss specific topics including germ cells, blood and muscle cell differentiation, left-right asymmetry and miRNAs. You'll have a two-hour lecture once per week to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
    
  
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    The Project is a year-long level 3 module. You will undertake detailed research on a chosen topic after discussion with a supervisor. Each project will involve collection of data by means such as experiment, questionnaire or observation, as well as the analysis and interpretation of the data in the context of previous work.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Science and Society 
   
   
    This module will explore the interactions between science and society through a series of lectures, discussion groups and workshops. Topics that will be explored include the ethical parameters that govern how scientific work is constrained, ways in which scientific discoveries can/should be disseminated to the wider community, the wider responsibilities that follow the acquisition of new knowledge and the concept of ‘citizen science’, where science takes place outside the traditional academic centres of work. This mode consists of a three-hour lecture incorporating discussion groups once per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biological Photography and Imaging II 
   
   
    Extends and develops your skills of creative and critical biological photography. You’ll continue to develop the practice and experience gained in Biological Photography and Imaging 1. You are encouraged to demonstrate increasing expertise in selected subject areas and/or specialist photographic techniques such as digital imaging and manipulation (using Photoshop CS software), digital video photography and editing, ecological and environmental photography, landscapes, macro and long lens photography and specialist lighting. Field and studio work continue to be essential elements of the module. You will have around three hours of lectures per week studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Evolution and Behaviour 
   
   
    A series of student-driven assignments, discussion groups and problem-solving workshops on evolutionary biology, with an emphasis on behaviour. You’ll consider topics such as adaptation, sex and evolution, kinship theory, communication, and human behavioural ecology. There are four hours of lectures and workshops each week in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Evolutionary Ecology 
   
   
    Considers current knowledge of, and research into, the ecological causes and evolutionary processes that govern natural selection, adaptation and microevolution in natural populations. You’ll examine three approaches to the study of evolutionary ecology: theoretical and optimality models; the comparative method; and direct measurement of natural selection in the wild. You’ll have two-to three hours of lectures each week in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Conservation Genetics  
   
   
    Considers the genetic effects of reduced population size, especially relating to the conservation of endangered species. You’ll study topics including genetic drift and inbreeding in depth, from theoretical and practical standpoints. You'll spend around one and a half hours per week in lectures studying this module, plus a two and a half hour computer practical.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Environmental Physiology  
   
   
    Thousands of different man-made chemicals enter the environment and some are highly persistent and/or toxic. You’ll consider how organisms respond to pollution and other external stresses in general, and to different classes of toxic chemicals in particular. Several of these responses can be utilised as biomarkers, giving advance warning of possible ecological damage. The molecular actions of several pesticides are outlined, as are the mechanisms through which pesticide resistance can appear in pest populations. Finally, you’ll consider the roles of semiochemicals in signalling between pests, predators and potential food species, illustrating how these can be exploited for the purposes of eco-friendly pest management. You'll have a three-hour lecture once per week plus two three-hour practicals to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Pathogens  
   
   
    A detailed understanding of the genetics and biochemistry behind the properties of parasites and microorganisms that cause major human diseases in the present day. You will have a three-hour lecture once per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Parasite Immunology 
   
   
    Considers immunological interactions between parasites and their hosts. Initially the mechanisms involved and the consequences of host responses/resistance to infection are reviewed across diverse taxa of parasitic organisms. You’ll discuss the strategies evolved by parasites to enable survival in the face of host immunity in some depth. You'll spend around three-hours per week in lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Conservation  
   
   
    Considers a range of approaches to conservation biology, such as the measurement and monitoring of biodiversity, and the legal frameworks and management strategies that exist to protect it. You’ll discuss particular threats to biodiversity, such as habitat loss and invasive species. You will spend around four hours per week in lectures and have four  three-hour practicals to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Population Genetics 
   
   
    You’ll consider the history and practice of population genetics research, with a focus on a quantitative approach to the subject, with training in problem-solving skills. You will spend around two hours within lectures per week studying this module, plus a two-hour computer practical.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 
   
   
    Considers ion channels at the molecular level, with topics including the structure and function of different ion channel groups and their modulation by drugs, pesticides and natural toxins. You’ll also consider the synthesis and transport of neurotransmitters and the formation and release of synaptic vesicles. This module involves one three-hour session per week incorporating eight lectures and two practicals.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
    
  
   Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    The project is a year-long module. Preparatory work (literature review and familiarisation with laboratory/field safety protocols etc.) occurs in autumn, with the bulk of the practical work in spring. You’ll choose the topic of your project from a list of suggestions relevant to your degree subject and will finalise this after consultation with your supervisor. The project involves an extensive piece of detailed research. Reading and collating earlier research by other scientists working in the area is an essential component. You’ll use your literature review to write a research grant proposal, which outlines the hypotheses to be tested, the proposed experimental design and the research costs associated with the project. The practical component involves collection of data from a laboratory or field investigation and appropriate analysis. Your findings will be interpreted in the context of previous work, and written up in a clear and concise final report in the form of a research paper.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Presentation Skills 
   
   
    An introduction to the presentation skills required in a modern scientific career. A series of lectures will provide you with background ideas about best practice in oral, written and internet-based research communication. Regular tutorials will require you to present and discuss with peers recent key papers in your broad field of study, and also to produce a written summary of a paper for a lay audience. In workshops, you will be asked to prepare a webpage and a poster using appropriate software. You will have between one and eight hours of lectures and workshops per week when studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cutting-Edge Research Technologies in Molecular Biology 
   
   
    This module will bring you up to date with the latest technological developments in molecular biology that you are unlikely to have encountered in detail in your first three years. We also discuss and explore how new technologies with broad implications come into existence and follow the process of establishment, acceptance and dissemination through the scientific community. ou will have a 3 hour workshop once per week for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Experimental Design and Analysis 
   
   
    This is an advanced level biological statistics module, building on basic undergraduate (Levels 1 and 2) training. Lectures discuss concepts in experimental design, biological probability, generalised linear modelling and multivariate statistics. Practical sessions build on this conceptual outline, giving you hands-on experience of problem solving and analytical software, and some basic programming skills. You will spend three to four hours within lectures and workshops when studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Process and Practice in Science 
   
   
    A consideration of science ‘as a process’, with brief introductions to the history, philosophy and sociological norms of science. You will cover aspects of the scientific literature and scientific communication, peer review, 'metrics’, including citation analysis, journal impact factors, and the 'h' and other indices of measuring scientists' performances. You will also cover ethics in science and the changing relationship between scientists, government and the public. You will have a three hour lecture once per week during this module.