Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   
    Essential Molecules, Genes and Cells (40 credits)  
   
   
    This module combines lectures and laboratory classes aims to introduce you to the structure and function of significant molecules in cells, and the important metabolic processes which occur inside them. You will study, amongst other topics, protein and enzyme structure and function, the biosynthesis of cell components, and the role of cell membranes in barrier and transport processes. You'll examine how information in DNA is used to determine the structure of gene products. Topics include DNA structure, transcription and translation and mutation and recombinant DNA technology.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Physiology (20 credits)  
   
   
    
    In this module, you will be introduced to the physiology of the major systems e.g. cardiovascular, nervous, musculo-skeletal mostly in in man, including some aspects of drug action. This module will allow to understand your biochemical and genetics knowledge in the context of the intact organism. This module includes lectures and laboratory classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamental Physical Chemistry (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module gives the student an introduction to the fundamental areas of physical chemistry, which underpin all areas of Chemistry. Emphasis will be placed on being able to apply the knowledge, and will include problem-solving skills. An appreciation of expected magnitudes of quantities and the importance of the correct employment of units and significant figures are emphasised.   
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamental Organic Chemistry (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module provides a fundamental understanding of the basics of organic chemistry, including nomenclature, molecular structure and bonding, stereochemistry and the chemical reactivity of common functional groups and reaction types through an understanding of their electronic properties and gives an introduction to fundamental synthetic transformations involving oxidation, reduction and carbon-carbon bond formation in organic synthesis. The modules shows how these transformations are the same as those used in nature for the construction of biological molecules.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamental Inorganic Chemistry (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module will develop a good working knowledge of the key aspects of inorganic chemistry (interpretation of the periodic table, atomic properties, electron configuration, periodicity, structure and bonding, symmetry, coordination complexes and their properties), which underpins much of the study of Chemistry.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Introductory Chemistry Laboratory Work (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module will teach you the essential laboratory skills needed to study physical, organic and inorganic chemistry. You will learn how to perform experiments, collect data and produce written reports from your results. There will also be explanations on the assessment of hazards and the preparation of risk assessments associated with experiments. There will be one four hour laboratory session per week for 15 weeks.  
    In addition to the above students without A level Maths at grade C or above will take:  
   
  
      
   
   
    Chemical Calculations 1 & 2 (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module aims to provide a firm understanding of the use of equations in chemistry, illustrated by chemical examples. You will be encouraged to think about whether an answer is reasonable or not within a chemical context and develop your knowledge on topics such as the common chemical units and conversions between them, scientific notation, as well as significant figures and functions and graphical representation among other topics. There will be two hours of lectures and workshops a week.  
    Students with A level Maths at grade C or above can choose 20 credits from:  
   
  
      
   
   
    Mathematics for Chemistry 1 & 2 (10 credits each)  
   
   
    This module will teach you the essential mathematic skills needed for the course. You will be provided with the definition, manipulation and graphical representation of important functions. More specifically you will be introduced to the calculus of one variable which is reviewed and then extended to develop techniques of differential and integral calculus together with solution of first-order differential equations. Basic elements of probability and statistics are introduced. There will be two hours of lectures per week with a one hour workshop.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Molecules that Changed the World (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module introduces selected molecules that have had significant impact on humankind, including medicines, drugs, poisons and materials. This is taught in historical context, placing significant importance on how and why these molecules made such an impact on society.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Frontiers in Chemistry (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module aims to introduce some selected topics at the forefront of current research and to introduce in outline fundamental chemical concepts that underpin these efforts. Topics include nanochemistry, energy generation, chemistry of ions etc  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  
    Laboratory Analysis of Proteins and Enzymes 
   
   
    In this module you will gain practical skills towards the study of proteins, antibodies and enzymes. Topics in this area include the subcellular localisation of an enzyme by means of homogenisation, and differential centrifugation and protein and enzyme activity assays, protein purification and analysis, bioinformatic analysis of proteins. There will be six hours of practical sessions a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Proteins: Structure and Function 
   
   
    This module will show you how to describe the general structure of soluble proteins and learn about a number of methods to analyse the different levels of protein structure. You will grasp the way in which enzyme’s actions are controlled and discuss complex enzyme mechanisms. In addition, you will be able to describe how individual proteins can be studied in molecular detail and appreciate the difficulties associated with studying membrane-bound proteins. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Intermediate Inorganic Chemistry 
   
   
    In this module you will survey the classical and new chemistry of the main group elements. There are several educational aims including the chance to use group theory as a tool in the analysis of molecular orbitals and vibrational spectra in inorganic chemistry. You will also be given an introduction into organometallic chemistry of the transition metals and use multinuclear NMR spectroscopy as a tool for the characterisation of molecules. There will be six one hour tutorials a year, five one hour workshops to attend and four one hour seminars per year.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Intermediate Organic Spectroscopy and Stereochemistry  
   
   
    In this module, you’ll discuss reactivity, suggest synthetic routes and interpret spectroscopic characterisation of unseen compounds. Topics studied include modern spectroscopic techniques, carbon-carbon bond forming reactions, and the influence of heteroatoms on reactivity. You’ll have around two hours of lectures each week in this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Introductory Signals and Metabolic Regulation  
   
   
    This module considers the mechanisms and purpose of cell to cell signalling and metabolic regulation and includes a) the regulation of carbohydrate metabolism b) an outline of the various major signalling systems in mammals including signal transduction in G-protein coupled signalling systems, growth factors, cytokines and their receptors, cell-cell signalling and the extracellular matrix (ECM) and finally the role of the ubiquitin-proteasome system.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Intermediate Physical Chemistry 
   
   
    This module aims to provide an appreciation and understanding of the application of thermodynamic principles to chemical systems. In addition you will find out about the foundations and applications of chemical kinetics while also giving an overview of the characteristic physical and chemical properties of interfaces. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  
    Chemical Biology and Enzymes 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the foundations of enzymological, chemical and molecular biological techniques needed to probe cellular processes and catalysis at the forefront of Chemical Biology research. By the end of the module you will understand the basic principles of protein expression, mutagenesis and purification, yeast two and three hybrid technology, protein NMR and Crystallography among other topics. There will be 1.5 hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Protein Folding and Biospectroscopy 
   
   
    This module will develop an understanding of protein structure, stability, design and methods of structural analysis. In addition you will understand the protein folding problem and experimental approaches to the analysis of protein folding kinetics and the application of site-directed mutagenesis. You will also be expected to develop a number of spectroscopic experimental techniques to probe protein structures. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemistry of Disease 
   
   
    This module will encourage you to use your biochemical knowledge to explain topics such as the hormonal control of metabolism, how fasting and overfeeding affects the body, and how problems within human body processing can lead to diseases. In addition, you will be able to describe two classes of important biochemical diseases including the inborn errors of metabolism and neurological disorders. There will be one hour of lectures a week for a full year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Data Analysis 
   
   
    In this module, you will take different approaches and techniques to present and discuss scientific data. Following a lecture-based introduction to methods, you will apply your knowledge to prepare and present talks and a scientific paper. By the end of the module, you will be able to present scientific data in a clear and concise way, use Beer’s Law to solve spectrophotometric problems, and understand the use of radioactivity in biochemical experiments. There will be one hour of lectures a week and workshop/seminar activities.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Microbiology and Infections 
   
   
    This module focuses on the molecular biology that drives the fundamental principles behind the survival of microorganisms and their interaction with humans. Lectures will discuss the interaction between the host and pathogens and how they drive the mechanisms of infection and immunity. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Biochemistry 
   
  
    This module is divided into three parts: Firstly the application of genetic engineering to construct vetors that maximize the expression the expression of protein from cloned genes or cDNAs in heterologous systems will be discussed. Modern methods for the purification of recombinant proteins will be described. Secondly this module covers some of the biochemistry invovled when a normal cell is transformed into a cancer cell. The following features will be included: (a) the nature of a cancer cell (b) the discovery and role of an oncogenes and tumour supressor genes (c) the action of chemical and physical carcinogens. In the spring the module covers the life history of a protein from birth (synthesis) to death (apoptosis). The other major aspects that are involved include a discussion of protein folding, the cytoskeleton, protein and vesicle trafficking including endocytosis and protein degradation.