Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   
    Essential Molecules, Genes and Cells (40 credits)  
   
   
    This module combines lectures and laboratory classes aims to introduce you to the structure and function of significant molecules in cells, and the important metabolic processes which occur inside them. You will study, amongst other topics, protein and enzyme structure and function, the biosynthesis of cell components, and the role of cell membranes in barrier and transport processes. You'll examine how information in DNA is used to determine the structure of gene products. Topics include DNA structure, transcription and translation and mutation and recombinant DNA technology.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Physiology (20 credits)  
   
   
    In this module, you will be introduced to the physiology of the major systems e.g. cardiovascular, nervous, musculo-skeletal mostly in in man, including some aspects of drug action. This module will allow you to understand your biochemical and genetics knowledge in the context of the intact organism. This module includes lectures and laboratory classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamental Physical Chemistry (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module gives the student an introduction to the fundamental areas of physical chemistry, which underpin all areas of Chemistry. Emphasis will be placed on being able to apply the knowledge, and will include problem-solving skills. An appreciation of expected magnitudes of quantities and the importance of the correct employment of units and significant figures are emphasised.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamental Organic Chemistry (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module provides a fundamental understanding of the basics of organic chemistry, including nomenclature, molecular structure and bonding, stereochemistry and the chemical reactivity of common functional groups and reaction types through an understanding of their electronic properties and gives an introduction to fundamental synthetic transformations involving oxidation, reduction and carbon-carbon bond formation in organic synthesis. The modules shows how these transformations are the same as those used in nature for the construction of biological molecules.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamental Inorganic Chemistry (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module will develop a good working knowledge of the key aspects of inorganic chemistry (interpretation of the periodic table, atomic properties, electron configuration, periodicity, structure and bonding, symmetry, coordination complexes and their properties), which underpins much of the study of Chemistry.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Introductory Chemistry Laboratory Work (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module will teach you the essential laboratory skills needed to study physical, organic and inorganic chemistry. You will learn how to perform experiments, collect data and produce written reports from your results. There will also be explanations on the assessment of hazards and the preparation of risk assessments associated with experiments. There will be one four hour laboratory session per week for 15 weeks.  
    In addition to the above students without A level Maths at grade C or above will take:  
   
  
      
   
   
    Chemical Calculations 1 & 2 (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module aims to provide a firm understanding of the use of equations in chemistry, illustrated by chemical examples. You will be encouraged to think about whether an answer is reasonable or not within a chemical context and develop your knowledge on topics such as the common chemical units and conversions between them, scientific notation, as well as significant figures and functions and graphical representation among other topics. There will be two hours of lectures and workshops a week.  
    Students with A level Maths at grade C or above can choose 20 credits from:  
   
  
      
   
   
    Mathematics for Chemistry 1 & 2 (10 credits each)  
   
   
    This module will teach you the essential mathematic skills needed for the course. You will be provided with the definition, manipulation and graphical representation of important functions. More specifically you will be introduced to the calculus of one variable which is reviewed and then extended to develop techniques of differential and integral calculus together with solution of first-order differential equations. Basic elements of probability and statistics are introduced. There will be two hours of lectures per week with a one hour workshop.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Molecules that Changed the World (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module introduces selected molecules that have had significant impact on humankind, including medicines, drugs, poisons and materials. This is taught in historical context, placing significant importance on how and why these molecules made such an impact on society.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Frontiers in Chemistry (10 credits)  
   
   
    This module aims to introduce some selected topics at the forefront of current research and to introduce in outline fundamental chemical concepts that underpin these efforts. Topics include nanochemistry, energy generation, chemistry of ions etc.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  
    Laboratory Analysis of Proteins and Enzymes  
   
   
    This practical module provides laboratory experience of basic techniques in protein chemistry including, amongst others, subcellular localisation of an enzyme by means of homogenisation, differential centrifugation and protein and enzyme activity assays, gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting, and bioinformatic analysis of protein structure using molecular modelling software. By the end of the module, you should be able to carry out various laboratory techniques such as subcellular fractionation, column chromatography and molecular modelling. There will be six hours of practical sessions a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Proteins: Structure and Function 
   
   
    This module considers, among others, general protein structure, enzyme kinetics and catalysis, and the properties and purification of membrane proteins. By the end of the module, you should be able to describe the structure and function of soluble proteins, explain how individual proteins can be explained in molecular detail, and understand the problems associated with studying membrane-bound proteins. This module consists of two hours of lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Intermediate Inorganic Chemistry 
   
   
    In this module you will survey the classical and new chemistry of the main group elements. There are several educational aims including the chance to use group theory as a tool in the analysis of molecular orbitals and vibrational spectra in inorganic chemistry. You will also be given an introduction into organometallic chemistry of the transition metals and use multinuclear NMR spectroscopy as a tool for the characterisation of molecules. There will be six 1-hour tutorials a year, five one hour workshops to attend and four 1-hour seminars per year.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Intermediate Organic Spectroscopy and Stereochemistry  
   
   
    In this module, you will discuss reactivity, suggest synthetic routes and interpret spectroscopic characterisation of unseen compounds. Topics studied include modern spectroscopic techniques, carbon-carbon bond forming reactions, and the influence of heteroatoms on reactivity. You will have around two hours of lectures each week in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Intermediate Physical Chemistry 
   
   
    This module aims to provide an appreciation and understanding of the application of thermodynamic principles to chemical systems. In addition you will find out about the foundations and applications of chemical kinetics while also giving an overview of the characteristic physical and chemical properties of interfaces. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Signals and Metabolic Regulation 
   
   
    This module considers the mechanisms and purpose of cell to cell signalling and metabolic regulation and includes a) the regulation of carbohydrate metabolism b) an outline of the various major signalling systems in mammals including  signal transduction in G-protein coupled signalling systems,  growth factors, cytokines and their receptors, cell-cell signalling and the extracellular matrix (ECM) and finally the role of the ubiquitin-proteasome system.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Principles and Analysis of Gene Function 
   
   
    This module considers the following topics: (i) intracellular packaging of DNA, (ii) mechanism and regulation of replication, transcription and translation (iii) theory of gene cloning, (iv) practical experience of nucleic acid isolation, manipulation and cloning, (v) characterisation of DNA and mRNA sequences representing specific genes, (vi) use of computers to analyse sequence databases and (vii) use of PCR for genotype analysis.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Lipid Metabolism and Oxidative Phosphorylation 
   
   
    In this module we will discuss the control of fat metabolism in human cells. The mechanisms involved in the oxidation of fat to yield molecules capable of being used by the electron transport system will be discussed. A detailed description of the membrane-bound electron transport chain will be given. In the second half of the module control of lipid biosynthesis and the role of lipoproteins will be described. Regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis will be covered by a detailed discussion of control of the key enzyme, HMG CoA reductase. Finally, in an attempt to encourage students to integrate knowledge from various sources, the control of lipid metabolism will be placed in context with control of other metabolic processes.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  
    Chemical Biology and Enzymes  
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the applications for a range of enzymological, chemical and molecular biological techniques needed to probe cellular processes and catalysis at the forefront in Chemical Biology Research. You will learn about the principles from a biophysical, molecular, biochemical and genetic perspective. There will be 1.5 hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemistry of Disease 
   
   
    This module will encourage you to use your biochemical knowledge to explain topics such as the hormonal control of metabolism, how fasting and overfeeding affects the body, and how problems within human body processing can lead to diseases. In addition, you will be able to describe two classes of important biochemical diseases including the inborn errors of metabolism and neurological disorders. There will be one hour of lectures a week for a full year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Biology and Infections  
   
   
    This module focuses on the molecular biology that drives the fundamental principles behind the survival of microorganisms and their interaction with humans. Lectures will discuss the interaction between the host and pathogens and how they drive the mechanisms of infection and immunity. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Biochemistry of Disease 
   
   
    This module is divided into three parts: Firstly the application of genetic engineering to construct vetors that maximize the expression the expression of protein from cloned genes or cDNAs in heterologous systems will be discussed. Modern methods for the purification of recombinant proteins will be described. Secondly this module covers some of the biochemistry invovled when a normal cell is transformed into a cancer cell. The following features will be included: (a) the nature of a cancer cell (b) the discovery and role of an oncogenes and tumour supressor genes (c) the action of chemical and physical carcinogens. In the spring the module covers the life history of a protein from birth (synthesis) to death (apoptosis). The other major aspects that are involved include a discussion of protein folding, the cytoskeleton, protein and vesicle trafficking including endocytosis and protein degradation.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules   
  
  
  
    Signal Transduction 
   
   
    In this module you will examine the molecular hardware and operational concepts used by eukaryotic cells to govern their growth, proliferation and phenotypic development. You will study how cells respond to their environment and communicate via the exchange of signalling factors that bind to specific target receptors. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    In this module you will be given the chance to undertake a research project in Biological Chemistry. You will be offered a selection of research areas and have the opportunity to specialise in a chosen field. All subjects will require a review of published work and the planning of a research project under the guidance of two supervisors. You will then present your findings orally and produce a written report. There will be 12 hours weekly across the year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemistry Project 
   
   
    This module will provide experience of contemporary research methods in Biochemistry by allowing students to design and perform experiments aimed at solving a specific biochemical problem. They will collect, data, discuss previous results relevant to their problem as well as write a clear report and have the opportunity to discuss their work with academic members of staff. Students will also present a short talk on their work to the rest of the class. There will be a minimum of 20 hours in the laboratory.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cellular and Molecular Immunology 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to advanced ideas about aspects of cellular and molecular immunology. You will learn about innate and humoral immunity and how humans can mount defence against infections from agents such as the HIV and diseases such as asthma. In addition you will find out about the major proteins involved and the genes coding for some of the proteins will be discussed. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Enterprise for Chemists 
   
   
    Unit A Students will learn about /experience factors that lead to successful commercial innovation They are shown routes to market for innovative ideas available from an academic/industrial viewpoint This includes working in teams to develop/present the business case for a new innovation as a Dragon’s Den Style Pitch in Semester1UnitB gives students understanding of how companies within chemistry using industries operate/integrate into the economy Including how companies are structured/organised into functional departments and how these integrate to contribute to form a successful business Some of the basic business skills/rules will be covered (selling, marketing, customer awareness and finance) as well as the aspects which drive innovation and success UnitC gives students an understanding of intellectual property, how it’s protected/used to create value in the business context. Aspects of IP law are highlighted with reference to forms of IPR including patents, trademarks, copyright, design rights and trade secrets including their relevance/everyday application within chemistry using industries. This course will demonstrate utilisation of this IP to give a company a competitive advantage within their market place At the end of the course students participate in a one day business exercise led by professionals from a chemicals company that tests all of the above skills and culminates with an assessed chemistry focused business presentation and work-plan at end of Semester 2.