Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   
    Essential Molecules, Genes and Cells (40 credits)  
   
   
    This module combines lectures and laboratory classes aims to introduce you to the structure and function of significant molecules in cells, and the important metabolic processes which occur inside them. You will study, amongst other topics, protein and enzyme structure and function, the biosynthesis of cell components, and the role of cell membranes in barrier and transport processes. You'll examine how information in DNA is used to determine the structure of gene products. Topics include DNA structure, transcription and translation and mutation and recombinant DNA technology.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Core Skills in Biochemistry and Genetics (20 credits)  
   
   
    With lectures, workshops and tutorials this module will enable you to develop the core skills needed by biochemists and geneticists in scientific writing, data handling and analysis, experimental design and scientific presentations. This module is designed to develop your problem solving scientific skills. An important aspect of this module is the integral tutorial system which will allow you to get to know the member of staff who will be your tutor for the duration of your studies.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Life on Earth (20 credits) 
   
   
    Life on Earth provides an introduction to the fundamental characteristics and properties of the myriad of organisms which inhabit our planet, from viruses, bacteria and Archaea, to plants and animals. In weekly lectures, and regular laboratory practical classes, you will consider how living organisms are classified, how they are related genetically and phylogenetically, and basic aspects of their structure and function.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Physiology (20 credits) 
   
   
    In this module, you will be introduced to the physiology of the major systems e.g. cardiovascular, nervous, musculo-skeletal mostly in in man, including some aspects of drug action. This module will allow you to understand your biochemical and genetics knowledge in the context of the intact organism. This module includes lectures and laboratory classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Chemistry for Life (20 credits)  
   
   
    To help you understand the chemical underpinnings of biochemistry you will study some essential chemistry in year 1 in lecture based modules which include interpretation of the periodic table, atomic properties, electron configuration, periodicity, structure and bonding, symmetry, coordination complexes and their properties), which underpins much of the study of chemistry. You will also develop an understanding of the basics of organic chemistry, including nomenclature, molecular structure and bonding, stereochemistry and the chemical reactivity of common functional groups and reaction types through an understanding of their electronic properties and how these are fundamental to biological reactions.  
   
  
      
   
      
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  
    Proteins: Structure and Function 
   
   
    This module considers, among others, general protein structure, enzyme kinetics and catalysis, and the properties and purification of membrane proteins. By the end of the module, you should be able to describe the structure and function of soluble proteins, explain how individual proteins can be explained in molecular detail, and understand the problems associated with studying membrane-bound proteins. This module consists of two hours of lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Genes, Genomes and Chromosomes 
   
   
    This module takes a survey of the structure and function of the genes, genomes and chromosomes of eukaryotic cells. Emphasis is placed on understanding the molecular organisation of these elements and the experimental approaches that have led to this understanding. This module consists of a single 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Medical Molecular Genetics 
   
   
    During this module, you will be presented information on the Human Genome Project and the methods employed in disease gene identification. You will cover topics including, among others, the identification of the genes responsible for some of the most common inherited disorders, cytogenetic and molecular genetic diagnoses of inherited disorders, and the development of strategies for treatment. The teaching is delivered through a series of single 3-hour lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular and Developmental Neurobiology 
   
   
    During this module, you will consider how the brain develops and connects, how the connections work, are maintained and repaired, how information is stored in the form of memory, and how our knowledge of neurobiology can be applied. This module involves spending 3 hours each week in practical sessions, alongside a single 3-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Developmental Biology 
   
   
    In this module, you will examine the basic concepts of vertebrate embryonic development. You will discuss specific topics including germ cells, blood and muscle cell differentiation, left-right asymmetry and miRNAs. The teaching for this module is delivered through a single 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Lipid Metabolism and Oxidative Phosphorylation 
   
   
    In this module we will discuss the control of fat metabolism in human cells. The mechanisms involved in the oxidation of fat to yield molecules capable of being used by the electron transport system will be discussed. A detailed description of the membrane-bound electron transport chain will be given. In the second half of the module control of lipid biosynthesis and the role of lipoproteins will be described. Regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis will be covered by a detailed discussion of control of the key enzyme, HMG CoA reductase. Finally, in an attempt to encourage students to integrate knowledge from various sources, the control of lipid metabolism will be placed in context with control of other metabolic processes.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Signals and Metabolic Regulation 
   
   
    This module considers the mechanisms and purpose of cell to cell signalling and metabolic regulation and includes a) the regulation of carbohydrate metabolism b) an outline of the various major signalling systems in mammals (endocrine, paracrine and autocrine) c) signal transduction in G-protein coupled signalling systems including second messengers, protein phosphorylation, amplification, adaption and cross-talk d) growth factors, cytokines and their receptors and signal transduction pathways including tyrosine kinases and oncogene activation and control of the cell cycle e) Cell-cell signalling and the extracellular matrix (ECM) including a description of the components of the ECM and the role of integrins in cell signalling f) regulation of cellular activity by changes in protein amount - the role of the ubiquitin-proteasome system.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Bacterial Genes and Development 
   
   
    Molecular events that occur during the control of gene expression in bacteria will be described. You'll consider case studies, which show how complex programmes of gene action can occur in response to environmental stimuli. You'll spend around three hours per week in lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    This module enables you to experience contemporary research methods first-hand. There will be at least three options available, including: (1) performing a laboratory-based research project on a topic related to the interests of a member of staff and producing a dissertation, (2) producing a group lab-project with open-ended aims and outcomes, to be decided by the group, including the design and conduct of the experiment with a dissertation, or (3) selecting a topic of interest to you and a member of staff, and producing an in-depth literature survey on the knowledge state of the topic decided upon.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Gene Regulation 
   
   
    This module examines the mechanisms through which eukaryotic genes are expressed and regulated, with emphasis placed on recent research on transcriptional control in yeast and post-transcriptional control in eukaryotes. The teaching on this module consists of a single 3- hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemistry of Disease 
   
   
    This module begins with a review of the hormonal control of metabolism, before moving on to a description of how fasting and overfeeding affect human biology. In particular, the module aims to use biochemical knowledge to explain two classes of important biochemical diseases: inborn errors of metabolism, and neurological disorders. This module consists of one hour of lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Data Analysis 
   
   
    In this module, you will take different approaches and techniques to present and discuss scientific data. Following a lecture-based introduction to methods, you will apply your knowledge to prepare and present talks and a scientific paper. By the end of the module, you will be able to present scientific data in a clear and concise way, use Beer’s Law to solve spectrophotometric problems, and understand the use of radioactivity in biochemical experiments. This module consists of one hour of lectures or workshops each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Biochemistry 
   
   
    This module is split into three main components: firstly, the application of genetic engineering to construct vectors that maximise the expression of protein from cloned genes in heterologous systems will be discussed. Secondly, the module will look at some of the biochemistry behind the transformation of normal cells into cancer cells. Finally, you will look at the life history of a protein from birth to death. This module consists of two hours of lectures each week.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Human Variation 
   
   
    This module covers genetic variation in humans, including variation at the DNA level, and the study of human population history using genetic methods. It will go on to cover recent advances in the analysis of human variation and will describe both the patterns of genetic diversity within and between populations, as well as the mechanisms which create them. The module consists of weekly three hour lectures.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Population Genetics 
   
   
    During this module, you will consider the history and practice of population genetics research, with a focus on a quantitative approach to the subject, whilst further developing your problem-solving skills. You will spend around 4 hours within lectures per week studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Conservation Genetics 
   
   
    This module describes the genetic effects of reduced population size, especially in relation to the conservation of endangered species. Topics will include, among others, random genetic drift and inbreeding, the importance of heterozygosity and the consequences of a loss of genetic variability, and methods of alleviating these factors. This module consists of a 2.5-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cancer Biology 
   
   
    Examines a selection of acquired and inherited cancers, and develops an understanding of the role of the genes involved and how they can be analysed. To study for this module you will have a two- or three-hour lecture once per week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Developmental Biology 
   
   
    You’ll consider the molecular mechanisms underlying stem cell function during embryogenesis and adulthood. This will involve studies of regeneration and repair of tissues and pluripotency. You will have one two-hour lecture per week in this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
   Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
  
    Research Presentation Skills 
   
   
    This module offers an introduction to the skills required in a modern scientific career. Through a series of lectures, you will become familiar with the best practice in oral, written and internet-based communication skills. This will be supplemented by tutorials, in which you will discuss recent key papers with peers, and write for a lay audience. Workshops will give you the opportunity to produce materials such as a web-page and poster. This module consists of one 2-hour lecture each week, and a series of single 6-hour workshops over six weeks.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Research Project 
   
   
    The project is a year-long module. Preparatory work (literature review and familiarisation with laboratory/field safety protocols etc.) occurs in autumn, with the bulk of the practical work in spring. You’ll choose the topic of your project from a list of suggestions relevant to your degree subject and will finalise this after consultation with your supervisor. The project involves an extensive piece of detailed research. Reading and collating earlier research by other scientists working in the area is an essential component. You’ll use your literature review to write a research grant proposal, which outlines the hypotheses to be tested, the proposed experimental design and the research costs associated with the project. The practical component involves collection of data from a laboratory or field investigation and appropriate analysis. Your findings will be interpreted in the context of previous work, and written up in a clear and concise final report in the form of a research paper.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cutting Edge Research Ideas in Molecular Biology 
   
   
    This module will bring you up to date with the latest technological developments in molecular biology that you are unlikely to have encountered in detail in your first three years. We also discuss and explore how new technologies with broad implications come into existence and follow the process of establishment, acceptance and dissemination through the scientific community. This module involves having a three hour workshop each week.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Experimental Design and Analysis 
   
   
    This is an advanced level biological statistics module, building on basic undergraduate (Levels 1 and 2) training. Lectures discuss concepts in experimental design, biological probability, generalised linear modelling and multivariate statistics. Practical sessions build on this conceptual outline, giving you hands-on experience of problem solving and analytical software, and some basic programming skills. You'll spend around three hours per week in lectures and workshops studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Process and Practice in Science 
   
   
    A consideration of science ‘as a process’, with brief introductions to the history, philosophy and sociological norms of science. You will cover aspects of the scientific literature and scientific communication, peer review, 'metrics’, including citation analysis, journal impact factors, and the 'h' and other indices of measuring scientists' performances. You will also cover ethics in science and the changing relationship between scientists, government and the public. You will have a three hour lecture once per week during this module.