Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   
  Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   
    Core Skills in Biochemistry (20 credits)  
   
   
    With lectures, workshops and tutorials this module will enable you to develop the core skills needed by biochemists in scientific writing, data handling and analysis, experimental design and scientific presentations. This module is designed to develop your problem solving scientific skills. An important aspect of this module is the integral tutorial system which will allow you to get to know the member of staff who will be your tutor for the duration of your studies.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Essential Molecules, Genes and Cells (40 credits)  
   
   
    This module combines lectures and laboratory classes aims to introduce you to the structure and function of significant molecules in cells, and the important metabolic processes which occur inside them. You will study, amongst other topics, protein and enzyme structure and function, the biosynthesis of cell components, and the role of cell membranes in barrier and transport processes. You'll examine how information in DNA is used to determine the structure of gene products. Topics include DNA structure, transcription and translation and mutation and recombinant DNA technology.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Physiology (20 credits)  
   
   
    In this module, you will be introduced to the physiology of the major systems e.g. cardiovascular, nervous, musculo-skeletal mostly in in man, including some aspects of drug action. This module will allow to understand your biochemical and genetics knowledge in the context of the intact organism. This module includes lectures and laboratory classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Chemistry for Life (20 credits)  
   
   
    To help you understand the chemical underpinnings of biochemistry you will study some essential chemistry in year 1 in lecture based modules which include interpretation of the periodic table, atomic properties, electron configuration, periodicity, structure and bonding, symmetry, coordination complexes and their properties), which underpins much of the study of chemistry. You will also develop an understanding of the basics of organic chemistry, including nomenclature, molecular structure and bonding, stereochemistry and the chemical reactivity of common functional groups and reaction types through an understanding of their electronic properties and how these are fundamental to biological reactions.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Optional Modules (20 credits) 
   
   
    You also choose 20 credits of optional modules from the School of Life Sciences or from other Schools in the University. Options from within the School of Life Sciences are as follows:  
   
  
      
   
  
    Life on Earth (20 credits) 
   
   
    Life on Earth provides an introduction to the fundamental characteristics and properties of the myriad of organisms which inhabit our planet, from viruses, bacteria and Archaea, to plants and animals. In weekly lectures, and regular laboratory practical classes, you will consider how living organisms are classified, how they are related genetically and phylogenetically, and basic aspects of their structure and function.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Evolution, Ecology and Behaviour (20 credits)  
   
   
    Starting with Darwin’s theory of evolution, you will learn how natural selection and other evolutionary forces have shaped the ways in which organisms interact with each other and their environment. In addition to lectures, practical classes will give you hands on experience with a range of ecological and behavioural concepts in the laboratory and the field.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamentals of Neuroscience (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module will give you a good grounding in the basic principles of the nervous system of humans and other animals. Topics will include neuroanatomy, cellular neuroscience, neuropharmacology, sensory systems, neuroendocrinology, memory, behavioural neuroscience and diseases of the nervous system. These will be delivered through weekly lectures and practical classes.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  
    Basic Molecular Pharmacology 
   
   
    This module introduces the basic mechanisms of drug action, receptors, signal transductions, call mediators, drug distribution and delivery, toxicology and genetic factors which will provide an understanding of drug action. You will understand the meaning behind pharmacology and learn how to use drugs as fundamental research tools. There will be one hour of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Laboratory Analysis of Proteins and Enzymes 
   
   
    This practical module provides laboratory experience of basic techniques in protein chemistry including, amongst others, subcellular localisation of an enzyme by means of homogenisation, differential centrifugation and protein and enzyme activity assays, gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting, and bioinformatic analysis of protein structure using molecular modelling software. By the end of the module, you should be able to carry out various laboratory techniques such as subcellular fractionation, column chromatography and molecular modelling. There will be six hours of practical sessions a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Proteins: Structure and Function 
   
   
    This module considers, among others, general protein structure, enzyme kinetics and catalysis, and the properties and purification of membrane proteins. By the end of the module, you should be able to describe the structure and function of soluble proteins, explain how individual proteins can be explained in molecular detail, and understand the problems associated with studying membrane-bound proteins. This module consists of two hours of lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Signals and Metabolic Regulation 
   
   
    This module aims to develop an understanding, at the molecular level, of the ways in which extracellular signals are transmitted into cells and mechanisms, by which intracellular metabolic reactions respond. You will study, among other topics, the regulation of carbohydrate metabolism, cell-cell signalling and the extracellular matrix (ECM), and the regulation of cellular activity by changes in protein amount. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Principles and Analysis of Gene Function 
   
   
    This module will consider topics including, but not limited to, intracellular packaging of DNA, mechanism and regulation of replication, transcription and translation, and the theory of gene cloning. By the end of the module you will understand the use of gene libraries, the basis of molecular methods for analysis of gene expression, and the application of molecular methods for analysis of gene expression. This module consists of a combination of lectures and practical sessions.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Medical Molecular Genetics 
   
   
    During this module, you will be presented information on the Human Genome Project and the methods employed in disease gene identification. You will cover topics including, among others, the identification of the genes responsible for some of the most common inherited disorders, cytogenetic and molecular genetic diagnoses of inherited disorders, and the development of strategies for treatment. The teaching is delivered through a series of single 3-hour lectures each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Intracellular and Transmembrane Transport 
   
   
    In this module you will gain an understanding of cell function which needs to be controlled by the transport of small molecules to large complexes. You will find out about the identity of major players in intracellular dynamics. In addition you will realise how you can apply this knowledge to other biological situations and be able to use scientific literature to analyse relevant scientific data.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Medical Pharmacology 
   
   
   
     Overview of clinical pharmacology including the use of drugs in the treatment of particular diseases. This module will provide an overview of diseases including cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, diabetes and obesity, indicating the drugs that can be used in the treatment of these diseases aand their mechanisms of action. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Genomic Detectives: A Virtual Molecular Analysis of Human Disease 
   
   
    This module serves as an introduction to the key skills of experimental design and data interpretation. There are a series of ‘virtual’ laboratory experiments designed by students, with appropriate controls in order to probe the function of a particular gene in a physiological condition. You must then interpret your findings and use these to direct additional experiments. By the end of the module you will present your data in the form of a research paper, a conference abstract and a full conference-type presentation.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Structure and Function of Macromolecules 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the discipline of structural biology using specific biological examples. There will be an overview of the structures and functions of biological macromolecules with an emphasis on proteins. You will also be introduced to modern structural methods in the context of their biological methods. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  
    Biochemistry of Disease 
   
   
    This module begins with a review of the hormonal control of metabolism, before moving on to a description of how fasting and overfeeding affect human biology. In particular, the module aims to use biochemical knowledge to explain two classes of important biochemical diseases: inborn errors of metabolism, and neurological disorders. There will be one hour of lectures a week for a full year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemistry Research Project 
   
   
    This module will give you the opportunity to use contemporary research methods in order to design and carry out an experiment aimed at solving a particular biochemical problem. You will collect, analyse, and interpret data, alongside researching previous results relevant to your study and writing up a clear and concise report. You will also discuss your work with academic members of staff in a viva voce (oral exam), as well as present a short talk on your work to peers. You will complete around 20 hours each week, on a computer or in the laboratory, for each semester.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Biochemistry 
   
   
    This module is split into three main components: firstly, the application of genetic engineering to construct vectors that maximise the expression of protein from cloned genes in heterologous systems will be discussed. Secondly, the module will look at some of the biochemistry behind the transformation of normal cells into cancer cells. Finally, you will look at the life history of a protein from birth to death. There will be two hours a week of lectures for a full year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Biochemistry of Cancer 
   
   
    In this module you will gain an insight into how cancer cells form, how they metastasise and the number of treatments available towards the treatment of cancer. You will become aware of features such as the role of oncogenes and anti-oncogenes in a normal and tumour cell, factors involved when a tumour cell transforms into a primary tumour and the biological basis for the treatment of patients from cancer among other topics. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Signal Transduction 
   
   
    In this module you will examine the molecular hardware and operational concepts used by eukaryotic cells to govern their growth, proliferation and phenotypic development. You will study how cells respond to their environment and communicate via the exchange of signalling factors that bind to specific target receptors. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Biology of Medicine 
   
   
    This module addresses the involvement of signal transduction and other molecular mechanisms in various clinical conditions. Many of the conditions described are common and of increasing importance e.g. diabetes. The lectures provide an insight into how modern molecular medicine has helped in the diagnosis, understanding and treatment of these common conditions.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cellular and Molecular Immunology 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to advanced ideas about aspects of cellular and molecular immunology. You will learn about innate and humoral immunity and how humans can mount defence against infections from agents such as the HIV and diseases such as asthma. In addition you will find out about the major proteins involved and the genes coding for some of the proteins will be discussed. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Microbiology and Infections 
   
   
    This module focuses on the molecular biology that drives the fundamental principles behind the survival of microorganisms and their interaction with humans. Lectures will discuss the interaction between the host and pathogens and how they drive the mechanisms of infection and immunity. There will be two hours of lectures a week.