Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   
    Core Skills in Biochemistry (20 credits)  
   
   
    With lectures, workshops and tutorials this module will enable you to develop the core skills needed by biochemists in scientific writing, data handling and analysis, experimental design and scientific presentations. This module is designed to develop your problem solving scientific skills. An important aspect of this module is the integral tutorial system which will allow you to get to know the member of staff who will be your tutor for the duration of your studies.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Essential Molecules, Genes and Cells (40 credits)  
   
   
    This module combines lectures and laboratory classes aims to introduce you to the structure and function of significant molecules in cells, and the important metabolic processes which occur inside them. You will study, amongst other topics, protein and enzyme structure and function, the biosynthesis of cell components, and the role of cell membranes in barrier and transport processes. You'll examine how information in DNA is used to determine the structure of gene products. Topics include DNA structure, transcription and translation and mutation and recombinant DNA technology.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Physiology (20 credits)  
   
   
    In this module, you will be introduced to the physiology of the major systems e.g. cardiovascular, nervous, musculo-skeletal mostly in in man, including some aspects of drug action. This module will allow to understand your biochemical and genetics knowledge in the context of the intact organism. This module includes lectures and laboratory classes.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Chemistry for Life (20 credits)  
   
   
    To help you understand the chemical underpinnings of biochemistry you will study some essential chemistry in year 1 in lecture based modules which include interpretation of the periodic table, atomic properties, electron configuration, periodicity, structure and bonding, symmetry, coordination complexes and their properties), which underpins much of the study of chemistry. You will also develop an understanding of the basics of organic chemistry, including nomenclature, molecular structure and bonding, stereochemistry and the chemical reactivity of common functional groups and reaction types through an understanding of their electronic properties and how these are fundamental to biological reactions.  
   
  
      
   
   
   
   
    Optional modules - 20 credits  
    You also choose 20 credits of optional modules from the School of Life Sciences or from other Schools in the University. Options from within the School of Life Sciences are as follows:  
   
   
    You also choose 20 credits of optional modules from the School of Life Sciences or from other Schools in the University. Options from within the School of Life Sciences are as follows:  
   
  
      
   
   
    Life on Earth (20 credits)  
   
   
    Life on Earth provides an introduction to the fundamental characteristics and properties of the myriad of organisms which inhabit our planet, from viruses, bacteria and Archaea, to plants and animals. In weekly lectures, and regular laboratory practical classes, you will consider how living organisms are classified, how they are related genetically and phylogenetically, and basic aspects of their structure and function.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Evolution, Ecology and Behaviour (20 credits)  
   
   
    Starting with Darwin’s theory of evolution, you will learn how natural selection and other evolutionary forces have shaped the ways in which organisms interact with each other and their environment. In addition to lectures, practical classes will give you hands on experience with a range of ecological and behavioural concepts in the laboratory and the field.  
   
  
      
   
   
    Fundamentals of Neuroscience (20 credits)  
   
   
    This module will give you a good grounding in the basic principles of the nervous system of humans and other animals. Topics will include neuroanatomy, cellular neuroscience, neuropharmacology, sensory systems, neuroendocrinology, memory, behavioural neuroscience and diseases of the nervous system. These will be delivered through weekly lectures and practical classes.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  
    Laboratory Analysis of Proteins and Enzymes 
   
   
    In this module you will gain practical skills towards the study of proteins, antibodies and enzymes. Topics in this area include the subcellular localisation of an enzyme by means of homogenisation, and differential centrifugation and protein and enzyme activity assays, protein purification and analysis, bioinformatic analysis of proteins. There will be six hours of practical sessions a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Proteins: Structure and Function 
   
   
    This module will show you how to describe the general structure of soluble proteins and learn about a number of methods to analyse the different levels of protein structure. You will grasp the way in which enzyme’s actions are controlled and discuss complex enzyme mechanisms. In addition, you will be able to describe how individual proteins can be studied in molecular detail and appreciate the difficulties associated with studying membrane-bound proteins. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Structure and Function of Macromolecules 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the discipline of structural biology using specific biological examples. There will be an overview of the structures and functions of biological macromolecules with an emphasis on proteins. You will also be introduced to modern structural methods in the context of their biological methods. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introductory Signals and Metabolic Regulation 
   
   
   
     This module considers the mechanisms and purpose of cell to cell signalling and metabolic regulation and includes a) the regulation of carbohydrate metabolism b) an outline of the various major signalling systems in mammals (endocrine, paracrine and autocrine) c) signal transduction in G-protein coupled signalling systems including second messengers, protein phosphorylation, amplification, adaption and cross-talk d) growth factors, cytokines and their receptors and signal transduction pathways including tyrosine kinases and oncogene activation and control of the cell cycle e) Cell-cell signalling and the extracellular matrix (ECM) including a description of the components of the ECM and the role of integrins in cell signalling f) regulation of cellular activity by changes in protein amount – the role of the ubiquitin-proteasome system. There will be two hours of lectures a week. 
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Intermediate Inorganic Chemistry 
   
   
    In this module you will survey the classical and new chemistry of the main group elements. There are several educational aims including the chance to use group theory as a tool in the analysis of molecular orbitals and vibrational spectra in inorganic chemistry. You will also be given an introduction into organometallic chemistry of the transition metals and use multinuclear NMR spectroscopy as a tool for the characterisation of molecules. There will be six 1-hour tutorials a year, five 1-hour workshops to attend and four 1-hour seminars per year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Genomic Diseases 
   
   
    This module serves as an introduction to the key skills of experimental design and data interpretation. There are a series of ‘virtual’ laboratory experiments designed by students, with appropriate controls in order to probe the function of a particular gene in a physiological condition. You must then interpret your findings and use these to direct additional experiments. By the end of the module you will present your data in the form of a research paper, a conference abstract and a full conference-type presentation.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Intracellular and Transmembrane Transport 
   
   
    In this module you will gain an understanding of cell function which needs to be controlled by the transport of small molecules to large complexes. You will find out about the identity of major players in intracellular dynamics. In addition you will realise how you can apply this knowledge to other biological situations and be able to use scientific literature to analyse relevant scientific data.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Lipid Metabolism and Oxidative Phosphorylation 
   
   
    In this module we will discuss the control of fat metabolism in human cells. The mechanisms involved in the oxidation of fat to yield molecules capable of being used by the electron transport system will be discussed. A detailed description of the membrane-bound electron transport chain will be given. In the second half of the module control of lipid biosynthesis and the role of lipoproteins will be described. Regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis will be covered by a detailed discussion of control of the key enzyme, HMG CoA reductase. Finally, in an attempt to encourage students to integrate knowledge from various sources, the control of lipid metabolism will be placed in context with control of other metabolic processes. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Principles and Analysis of Gene Function 
   
  
    This module considers the following topics: (i) intracellular packaging of DNA , (ii) mechanism and regulation of replication, transcription and translation (iii) theory of gene cloning, (iv) practical experience of nucleic acid isolation, manipulation and cloning, (v) characterisation of DNA and mRNA sequences representing specific genes, (vi) use of computers to analyse sequence databases and (vii) use of PCR for genotype analysis. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  
    Biochemistry of Disease 
   
   
    This module will encourage you to use your biochemical knowledge to explain topics such as the hormonal control of metabolism, how fasting and overfeeding affects the body, and how problems within human body processing can lead to diseases. In addition, you will be able to describe two classes of important biochemical diseases including the inborn errors of metabolism and neurological disorders. There will be one hour of lectures a week for a full year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Biochemistry Research Project 
   
   
    This project aims to give students the ability to analyse a relevant biological problem in-depth in a modern research environment. There will be three different approaches available including the opportunity to research a laboratory-based project on a topic related to the interests of academic staff, a group-lab based project with outcomes to be decided by the student or an individual topic of interest with an in-depth literary survey of its background. There will be two days a week of project work.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Biochemistry 
   
   
    This module is split into three main components: firstly, the application of genetic engineering to construct vectors that maximise the expression of protein from cloned genes in heterologous systems will be discussed. Secondly, the module will look at some of the biochemistry behind the transformation of normal cells into cancer cells. Finally, you will look at the life history of a protein from birth to death. There will be two hours a week of lectures for a full year.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Cancer Genetics 
   
   
    This module aims to develop your understanding of a range of inherited and acquired cancers, along with an understanding of the role of genes involved and how they can be analysed. By the end of the module, you will be able to demonstrate, among others, a knowledge of the implications of genetics tests, the ability to interpret a range of genetic testing relevant to cancer, and the ability to perform mutation scanning and sequencing of large genes. This is a distance-learning module, delivered through a series of single 30-minute podcasts each week, plus problem-based exercises and relevant extra material.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Chemical Biology and Enzymes 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to the applications for a range of enzymological, chemical and molecular biological techniques needed to probe cellular processes and catalysis at the forefront in Chemical Biology Research. You will learn about the principles from a biophysical, molecular, biochemical and genetic perspective. There will be 1.5 hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Biochemistry of Cancer 
   
   
    In this module you will gain an insight into how cancer cells form, how they metastasise and the number of treatments available towards the treatment of cancer. You will become aware of features such as the role of oncogenes and anti-oncogenes in a normal and tumour cell, factors involved when a tumour cell transforms into a primary tumour and the biological basis for the treatment of patients from cancer among other topics. There will be two hours of lectures a week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Microbiology and Infection 
   
   
    The course will be delivered in two sections. Section one will include:structure, function and molecular biology of information processing in bacteria. This will include discussion of cell envelop structures, extracellular secretion, enzymology, protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions in DNA repair, recombination, replication, transcription and translation and the use of these organisms in biotechnology. Section two will include: a discussion of the biology and biological chemistry of emerging or recently emerged viral and bacterial diseases that are important for public health: HIV, avian influenza, and antibiotic resistant 'superbugs'. Lectures will cover the interaction of the host and the pathogens and highlight how these drive mechanisms of infection and immunity. In addition, the course will include an analysis of anti-viral and anti-bacterial drugs and their modes of action at the atomic level and how microbial diseases can be transmitted to humans.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Signal Transduction 
   
   
    
    All cells sense and respond to their environment; in multi-cellular organisms the environment consists largely of other cells. Cells communicate by the exchange of signalling factors that bind to specific target receptors. Binding induces a response inside the cell that can be rapid or delayed. Almost invariably the response involves alterations in gene expression.  
    Signal transduction describes the communication events within the cell that determine which genes are switched on and off. Signal transduction orchestrates the growth, proliferation and differentiation of cells, the development of embryos, the function of organs and the repair and turnover of damaged tissue. Signal transduction describes, in effect, the central processes of life.  
    The scope of the subject is broad and continues to expand rapidly. For this reason the module does not attempt to deal with every aspect of signal transduction. Instead, it aims to describe basic concepts and illustrate them with reference to key signal transduction pathways, thereby providing a foundation from which eukaryotic signal transduction in all its manifestations and complexity becomes accessible.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Protein Folding and Biospectroscopy 
   
  
    The course will develop an understanding of protein structure, stability, design and methods of structural analysis; understand the protein folding problem and experimental approaches to the analysis of protein folding kinetics and the application of site-directed mutagenesis. A range of experimental spectroscopic techniques will be introduced to probe protein structure and stability based on secondary structure and tertiary interactions and to probe the nature of the active site of metalloproteins using equilibrium and time-resolved spectroscopy.