Modules  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer. 
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory:  
  
    An Introduction to Structure, Periodicity and Coordination Chemistry 
   
   
    This module builds on your previous studies in chemistry and provides a firm foundation in topics including: atomic and molecular structure; the shapes of molecules ; chemical bonding; Lewis structures;  molecular shape and symmetry; Intermolecular interactions and periodic trends in the properties of the elements of the s- and p-blocks;  the chemistry of the transition metal elements and their coordination complexes. You’ll spend around two hours per week studying this module with weekly tutorials.   
   
  
      
   
  
    An Introduction to Spectroscopy, Energy and Bonding in Chemistry 
   
   
    In this module you will learn about the the development of quantum theory and the spectroscopy of the hydrogen atom. You will examine the theories used to describe the bonding in molecules and will develop an understanding of microwave and infra-red spectroscopies. The module also introduces you to some of the key concepts in thermodynamics including enthalpy, entropy and free energy and their application in describing equilibria and electrochemical processes. You will develop an understanding of the key concepts in reaction kinetics. You’ll spend two hours per week studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    An Introduction to Organic Molecules and their Reactivity 
   
  
    You’ll examine the fundamental principles of organic chemistry. This will include nomenclature, bonding concepts, orbitals and the shape, stereochemistry and acid-base properties of organic molecules.
    Later in the module will focus on reactivity and important reactions and transformations in organic chemistry. You’ll spend two hours per week studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Foundation Laboratory Work 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the essential laboratory skills that are required in inorganic, organic and physical chemistry. You’ll spend around 8 hours per week in laboratory practicals performing experiments, and collecting and analysing data. You’ll present written reports of your experimental work that will form part of the assessment for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Chemistry Study Skills 
   
   
   You’ll follow this introductory module right at the start of your course. It is designed to develop your study skills so that you can work effectively at University. The module will also introduce you to first year undergraduate laboratory chemistry. You’ll spend around four hours in your first week in practical sessions studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional:  
  
    Chemical Calculations 1 
   
  
    You’ll gain a firm understanding of the use of mathematical equations in a chemical context through the study of topics including: scientific notation and significant figures; common chemical units and conversions between them; rearrangement of chemical expressions and their graphical representation. You’ll spend three hours per week in lectures and workshops for this module. Please note, if you do not possess a grade A-C in A level mathematics (or equivalent) then this module is compulsory. 
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Chemical Calculations 2 
   
   
    This module extends the material covered in Chemical Calculations 1. You’ll study topics including trigonometry, differentiation and integration, and differential equations for chemical problems. You’ll spend three hours per week in lectures and workshops studying these topics. Please note, if you do not possess a grade A-C in A level mathematics (or equivalent) then this module is compulsory.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecules that Changed the World 
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to selected molecules that have had a significant impact on humankind, including medicines, drugs, poisons and materials. You’ll examine these in their historical context, placing importance on how and why these molecules made such an impact on society.  You’ll discuss how unique chemical names came about, the people and cultures involved, and the key discoveries and events which lead to their significance through a one hour lecture per week. The module is assessed in part by a group poster presentation that will help develop your communication skills.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Green Chemistry and Processing 
   
  
    In this module you’ll look at green chemistry in its broadest sense, covering the fundamental concepts and chemistry involved in making chemical processes cleaner and more environmentally benign. You’ll spend one hour per week in lectures, seminars and workshops over the whole year studying this module.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Frontiers in Chemistry 
   
   
   This module will introduce you to selected topics at the forefront of current research in Chemistry from a Physical Chemistry perspective. Example topics include: nanochemistry and its applications; energy generation and storage technologies; chemistry in the digital age; the chemistry of ions; and the application of advanced photon sources. You’ll spend around 2 hours per week in lectures and seminars for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Mathematics for Chemistry 1 
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to topics such as: functions of single variables; differential calculus of a single variable; integral calculus of a single variable; and basic probability and statistics. You’ll spend three hours per week in workshops and lectures for this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Mathematics for Chemistry 2 
   
   
    You’ll build upon your knowledge from Mathematics for Chemistry 1 and spend around three hours per week lectures and workshops. Topics you’ll study include: complex numbers; differential calculus; and the algebra of matrices and their applications in chemistry.   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
      
   Compulsory:   
   
   Core Laboratory Work 
   
   
    This module builds on the practical, analytical and communication skills developed in the first year and introduces experiments across the range of chemistry, based on your second year theory modules. You’ll spend around 10 hours per week in practicals for this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Equilibria, Rates and Interfaces 
   
   
    You’ll build upon the principles of thermodynamics and kinetics developed in your first year, applying this to gaseous and liquid bulk phases, liquid to gas and solid to gas interfaces, and electrochemical cells. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and workshops studying this module.   
   
  
      
   
   
   General Inorganic Chemistry 
   
   
    You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures studying topics including the synthesis, bonding and reactivity of organometallic compounds, the use of symmetry and group theory to interpret infra-red spectra and NMR spectroscopy in inorganic chemistry. Further support is provided by tutorials every third week.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Literature & Communication Skills 
   
   
    You’ll be introduced to methods of accessing and critically appraising the chemical literature that will develop  your communication and team working skills through oral and written presentations. You’ll spend around 12 hours per week in practicals studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Quantum Chemistry and Spectroscopy 
   
   
    You’ll study topics including: particles and waves; vibrating molecules; orbitals; electron spin and spin-orbit coupling; Einstein coefficients; and centrifugal distortion. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and one hour in workshops that run every three weeks for this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Synthesis & Spectroscopy 
   
   
    In this module you’ll discuss the reactivity of, suggest synthetic routes for and interpret the spectroscopic characterisation of organic compounds including some natural products. Topics studied include modern spectroscopic techniques, carbon-carbon bond forming reactions, and the influence of heteroatoms on reactivity. You’ll attend two hours of lectures each week in this module and tutorials every third week.  
   
  
      
   
    Optional:  
  
    Atmospheric Chemistry 
   
  
    You’ll study topics such as the physical properties of the atmosphere, chemistry of ozone in the stratosphere, global warming, and analytical methods in atmospheric chemistry in three hours of lectures each week.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Principles of Analytical Chemistry 
   
  
    You’ll be introduced to the principles of analytical chemistry, including the principal types of instrumentation used and the statistical treatment of analytical results. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and workshops studying this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Medicinal Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Microbiology 
   
   
    This module introduces students to the chemistry of the fundamental building blocks of life; the structures of, and replication processes in prokaryotes; and how these can be disrupted by anti-infectives and harnessed in protein engineering. Fundamental concepts in medicinal chemistry and drug discovery are presented including the mode of action of a number of anti-cancer agents and the basic requirements for drug delivery, metabolism and targeting. . You’ll spend two hours each week in lectures for this module.   
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Calculus and Differential Equation Techniques 
   
   
    You will be introduced to the differential calculus of functions and vector operators. Spending three hours per week in lectures and workshops, you’ll consider the development of techniques for the solution of boundary and initial value problems for ordinary differential equations.     
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
    
   Typical Year Three Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory:  
  
    Advanced Laboratory Techniques 
   
   
    You’ll be taught advanced experimental techniques in organic, inorganic and physical chemistry, providing you with experience in experiment design and the recording, analysis and reporting of data. You’ll achieve this through a focused mini-project culminating in individual oral and written presentations and a lab report. You’ll spend around 10 hours a week in practical sessions.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Bioinorganic and Metal Coordination Chemistry 
   
  
    You’ll study the roles of the transition metal elements in biology including iron in haemoglobin and myoglobin, metal centres in enzymes and the use of metal complexes in medicine. You learn about the physical methods used to study the electronic structure of transition metal centres and the synthesis and the application of coordination chemistry in metal extraction, photochemistry and catalysis. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures, tutorials and workshops studying this module.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Catalysis 
   
  
    This module will develop your knowledge and understanding of heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis, catalyst promotion and the concept of catalytic cycles. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and seminars for this module. 
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Chemical Bonding and Reactivity 
   
  
    You’ll learn about the fundamental requirements for two molecules to react and how to assess the likelihood of reactivity based on energy level structure.  You’ll learn about experiments that can probe the outcomes of reaction and experiments that can promote reaction.  You’ll learn about some theoretical methods that can be used to understand reactivity. The module will progress at two lectures per week, with four workshops interspersed throughout the semester and regular problem sheets.    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Organometallic and Asymmetric Synthesis 
   
  
    You'll learn about a range of modern reagents and synthetic methodology, and how these are applied to the synthesis of organic target molecules, such as natural products and active pharmaceuticals. You'll learn how the use of protecting groups and directing groups can be used to enable complex molecule synthesis by controlling chemoselectivity, stereoselectivity and regioselectivity, and how modern palladium-mediated cross-coupling reactions can be used to synthesise complex organic molecules.  
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Pericyclic Chemistry and Reactive Intermediates 
   
   
    In this module you will use of frontier molecular orbital analysis to explain and predict stereochemical and regiochemical ooutcomes of pericyclic reactions You will also learn about the generation and use of reactive intermediates in synthesis such as radicals, carbenes and nitrenes. You will spend two hours in lectures per week in this module and will attend tutorials every three weeks.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Solids, Interfaces and Surfaces 
   
  
    You’ll study the relationships between structure and properties of solids, and develop electronic structure theories that account for a wide range of properties of solids. You’ll learn about semi-conductors, photoconductivity, LEDs and solar cells and attend around two lectures per week in this module.
    
   
  
      
   
    Optional:  
   
   Contemporary Drug Discovery 
   
  
    This module explores modern approaches to drug discovery and will involve discussions on how chemical structure influences the molecular properties, biological activity, and toxicity of drugs. Many examples from case histories of successful medicines will be used to illustrate the underlying chemical principles.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Communicating Chemistry 
   
  
    In this module, you’ll spend around 8 hours per week on placement in a school, teaching in a classroom. You will attend training sessions and you’ll keep a journal, provide a lesson pack and give a presentation on your experiences being a classroom assistant. These will form the basis for assessment in this module.
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Chemical Biology and Enzymes 
   
   
    In this module you’ll develop an understanding of the basic principles of protein expression, mutagenesis and purification. Areas you’ll consider include: yeast two and three hybrid technology; microarrays; protein NMR; and protein X-ray crystallography. You’ll spend around two hours per week studying for this module  
   
  
      
   
  
    Topics in Inorganic Chemistry 
   
   
    You’ll study aspects of solid state materials chemistry and f-Block chemistry including their synthesis, technological uses and applications, electronic structure, spectroscopy and optical properties, magnetism and roles in catalysis.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Molecular Modelling 
   
   
    This module will introduce you to molecular modelling with a focus on applications in the pharmaceutical chemistry. You will study the computer simulation of the properties of molecules and learn about molecular modelling techniques in drug discovery.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Drug discovery: the development of new medicines 
   
   
    You’ll explore the vital role of chemistry in drug discovery, involving discussions of the way chemical structure influences the molecular properties, biological activity, and toxicity of drugs. Many examples from case histories of successful medicines will be used to illustrate the underlying chemical principles. This module is taught through nine interactive workshops presented by experienced medicinal chemists from GlaxoSmithKline and staff in the School of Chemistry.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Protein Folding and Biospectroscopy 
   
   
    You’ll develop an understanding of protein structure and the methods for structural analysis. A range of experimental techniques will be introduced to examine stability and to probe the nature of the active site in a range of proteins. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and workshops studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
  Typical Year Four Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory:  
  
    Chemistry Research Project 
   
  
    You will be welcomed into one of the research groups within the School of Chemistry to undertake an in-depth research project. All projects will involve a review of relevant published work and the planning and execution of a research topic under the guidance of two supervisors.
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Chemistry Research Project (overseas) 
   
  
    You’ll have the opportunity to undertake a research project in chemistry at a university in continental Europe. All projects will require a review of relevant published work and the planning and execution of research.
    
   
  
      
   
    Optional:  
   
   Advanced Inorganic Chemistry 
   
   
    Building on your knowledge from the previous years' modules in inorganic chemistry, you’ll study topics including: electron transfer pathways; inorganic chemistry in biological systems; the principles of molecular and supramolecular photochemistry; applications of inorganic photochemistry; and photocatalysis. You’ll spend around two hours in lectures and seminars each week for this module.   
   
  
      
   
   
   Contemporary Physical Chemistry 
   
   
    You’ll learn about the properties of matter from condensed matter through to gas phase including the novel states of matter such as ultracold molecules in traps and liquid He nanodroplets, microsolvated clusters, and low dimensional carbon structures. You’ll study the dynamics of chemical processes  and the capability of modern light sources allowing for the study of time-resolved measurements on timescales ranging from pico- to attoseconds. You’ll study this module through two hours of lectures per week.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Contemporary Organic Synthesis and the Construction of Bioactive Targets 
   
   
    You’ll focus on the synthesis of a variety of architecturally complex bioactive targets, with particular reference to the goals and achievements of targeted synthesis. There is a particular emphasis on the use of modern synthetic methodology to address problems such as chemoselectivity, regiocontrol, stereoselectivity and atom economy. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying this module.   
   
  
      
   
   
   Special Topics in Chemistry 1 
   
   
    In this module you’ll select two out of the following units: astrophysical chemistry; inorganic reaction mechanisms; medicines from nature; molecular and laser spectroscopy; solid state materials chemistry. For each unit, you will spend around two hours each week in lectures and seminars.   
   
  
      
   
   
   Special Topics in Chemistry 2 
   
   
    In this module you’ll select two out of the following units: biosynthesis and biocatalysis; nucleic acids; applications of NMR; surface and interface studies; polymer chemistry. For each unit, you will spend around two hours each week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Special Topics in Chemistry 3 
   
  
    You’ll select two specialised topics to study in depth from: bio-organic mechanisms; chemistry for the environment; photon molecule interactions; chemical sensors. You’ll spend around two hours a week studying for this module.
    
   
  
      
   
   
   Self-assembly and Bottom-up Approaches to Nanostructure Fabrication 
   
   
    In this module you’ll study the approaches to the fabrication of molecular assemblies on the nanoscale. You’ll gain an understanding of the nature of intermolecular forces, paying particular attention to their application to self-assembly. You’ll spend around two hours per week studying this module.   
   
  
      
   
   
   Chemical Biology and Enzymes 
   
   
    In this module you’ll develop an understanding of the basic principles of protein expression, mutagenesis and purification. Areas you’ll consider include: yeast two and three hybrid technology; microarrays; protein NMR; and protein X-ray crystallography. You’ll spend around two hours per week studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Enterprise for Chemists 
   
   
    You’ll understand how companies within the chemical sector operate and integrate into the economy and learn about their structure and organisation and how these contribute to form a successful business.  You’ll learn about the factors that lead to successful innovation, including evaluation and management of an idea or concept in chemistry. In addition, you’ll consider the factors required to extract value from a product or concept, and the potential marketing routes available from both an academic and industrial viewpoint.  You’ll develop an understanding of intellectual property, how it is protected and used to create value in the business context. Relevant aspects of intellectual property law will be highlighted, including patents, trademarks, copyright, and trade secrets, with an examination of their relevance and everyday application within the chemistry industries.