Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules   
  
  
  
    Elementary Logic 
   
  
    This module provides an introduction to modern logic including technical vocabulary required to aide your understanding of modern philosophical work. You’ll discuss the symbolism of modern logic, the theory of the structure of thought and practice translation between symbolism and English. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Appearance and Reality 
   
   
    
    In this module you’ll examine some of the central themes surrounding the work of John Locke, one of the first philosophers who sought to integrate philosophy with our modern scientific worldview. Topics covered include: empiricism and science, perception, justification and scepticism and the nature of objects among others. You’ll have two hours of lectures and on some weeks an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on other weeks throughout the semester. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Ethics 
   
  
    This module introduces you to some of the main ethical questions studied by philosophers. The first part focuses on some contemporary moral problems (for example, the justification of punishment). The second part of the course looks at some normative ethical theories and concepts that provide ways of approaching such moral problems. The third part of the course considers some challenges to the idea of systematic moral inquiry (such as relativism, egoism and emotivism). You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Reasoning and Argument: Introduction to Philosophical Method 
   
  
    In this module you’ll learn a series of key skills needed to follow critical methods of philosophical inquiry. The aim is to help you understand the structure and nature of arguments of others and improve your reasoning ability to assist you in your further studies during your course. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and an hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on other weeks throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Self, Mind and Body 
   
  
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the important central issues in philosophy of self, mind and body which continue to be debated to present day. You’ll examine Descarte’s Meditations focusing on his thoughts on dualism and mind-body interaction, comparing these with other related topics. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Applied Ethics 
   
  
    What is the moral status of animals? What are the limits of free speech? What are the moral issues when discussing abortion? Is affirmative action unjust? In this module you will be looking at these and other issues that arise when we try to put ethics into practice. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Existence of God 
   
  
    This module will examine the basic philosophical issues that concern the existence of God. The lectures will cover such topics including: Cosmological Argument, the Ontological Argument, the Design Argument, and the Problem of Evil. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Plato 
   
  
    This module will discuss a number of problems tackled by Plato. Attention will be given to the development of the theory of the forms, but we will be working towards an understanding of the motivations for the development of this theory which may be found in his moral/political philosophy. You’ll have two hours of lectures for some weeks and an hour-long lecture in others with an hour-long seminar throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Issues in Feminist Philosophy 
   
  
    This module will provide an introduction to some of the issues discussed in contemporary feminist philosophy, considering a range of sometimes opposing feminist views on topics including: pornography, feminine appearance, and gender roles within the family and in the workplace. You’ll also examine the ways in which feminist writers have shown that matters not traditionally considered political do in fact have political significance. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    History of Western Philosophy 
   
   
    
    Through considering some of the greatest thinkers who have ever lived, you will become familiar with some of the main philosophical ideas which have shaped western analytical philosophy. You will understand how and why these ideas arose and the context in which they were developed. The thinkers which could be covered include: Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, St Augustine, St Aquinas, Hume, among others. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures and seminars. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Studying the Greek World 
   
  
    This module provides you with a wide ranging interdisciplinary introduction to the history, literature and art of the Greek World from c.1600-31 BC. As well as examining all the major chapters of Greece's history, you’ll also explore simultaneous developments in Greek literary and artistic culture. You’ll also consider how ancient Greek culture is received in modern western culture. You’ll have two hours of lectures weekly studying this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Studying the Roman World 
   
  
    This module provides you with an introduction to the history, literature and art of the Roman World from the beginnings of the city of Rome to the fall of the Roman Empire in the West. As well as examining all the major chapters of Rome's history, you’ll also explore simultaneous developments in Roman literary and artistic culture. This module will also examine the relationship of the Roman World to the Greek world, and will complement the module studying the Greek World.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Interpreting Ancient Art 
   
  
    This module complements and builds on the broad survey modules ‘Studying the Greek World’ and ‘Studying the Roman World’ by exploring Greek and Roman art in more detail through a combination of lectures and seminars. Its general aim is to give you a broad range or overview of visual material from classical antiquity, whilst concentrating on a cross-section of the most famous and talked about objects and monuments of Greek and Roman culture.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Interpreting Ancient Literature 
   
  
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the study of Ancient Greek and Latin literature by focusing on a representative theme. Recent themes have included ‘Performance and Persuasion’ and ‘Love and War’. You’ll explore issues such as the relationship between literature and society, how texts were received by both ancient and modern audiences and the analysis of rhetoric and literary style. You’ll have two hours of lectures weekly supported by eight hour-long seminars throughout the year.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
  
    Independent Second-Year Project 
   
  
    This module is your opportunity to expand your knowledge of the Classical world in an area which interests you, and to experiment with a method of communicating that knowledge which is different from the usual assessment practices of essay-writing, exam-writing and seminar-presentation. You might undertake research that leads to (for example) the construction of a database, or to the reconstruction of some ancient Greco-Roman artefact. The topic and form of the project chosen must both be approved by the module convener.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Classics and Popular Culture 
   
  
    This team-taught module explores the reception of ancient Greek and Roman culture in modern popular media such as films, theatre, novels, museums, architecture, children's literature and comics, and sets out to reach an understanding of how these receptions influence the way Greek and Roman culture is approached, used, and questioned. You will spend four hours in lectures and two hours in seminars each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Extended Source Study 
   
  
    This module is designed to develop your skills of research, analysis and written presentation as preparation for your third-year dissertation. You write a 5,000-word essay chosen from a range of worksheet topics, each focusing on a single piece of ancient source material. You will be provided with a topic for investigation, starter bibliography and tips on how to approach the question. The questions will suggest a range of possible approaches from evaluation of historical source material to exploration of literary and/or artistic effects, relationships with other material, discussion of context or reception. A number of seminars and consultation sessions will be held in order to help you approach and develop your source study.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Nature of Meaning 
   
   
    
    The module begins with an exploration of various theories of naming, paying particular attention to the works of Frege, Russell, and Kripke. We then turn our attention to various puzzles concerning the nature of meaning, including the distinction between analytic and synthetic sentences. In the final part of the module, we move on to a discussion of some of the mainstream theories of meaning; particularly, a truth-conditional semantics, and we explore how this might be developed to take into account indexical terms such as `I', `now', and `here'. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar. 
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Freedom and Obligation 
   
  
    This module combines consideration of the political philosophy of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and J.S. Mill with related themes in contemporary debates. The module is designed to introduce you to each of the thinkers and then to consider how related issues are treated by contemporary writers. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Mind and Consciousness 
   
  
    This module aims to introduce you to some of the major issues within contemporary philosophy of mind. We will examine four topics and the interactions between them: intentionality, consciousness, mental causation and the status of physicalism. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Knowledge and Justification 
   
  
    This module explores contemporary treatments of issues pertaining to knowledge and the justification of belief. It addresses issues such as the following: the structure of justification and its relation to one's mental states and evidence; the justification of induction; the notion of a priori justification and the relation between your evidence and what you know, among others. You’ll have two hours of lectures some weeks and a hour-long lecture with an hour-long seminar on others throughout the semester.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Normative Ethics 
   
  
    You’ll gain an in-depth understanding of the main positions in contemporary normative ethics; their variations, strengths, weaknesses and historical precedents. You’ll have a weekly two hour lecture and one hour seminar.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Being, Becoming and Reality 
   
   
   
     In this module you’ll discuss several advance topics in metaphysics. The module will cover a broad range of topics including existence, nothingness and truthmaking, and truthmakers. Theories of substance, identity, constitution and composition will be explored, among others to enhance the skills required to carry out research in philosophy. The teaching will be delivered through a mixture of lectures and seminars.  
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules   
  
  
  
    Sparta 
   
  
    Sparta dominates much of archaic and classical Greek history, and has figured prominently in the thought and imagination of other Western societies from antiquity to the present day. This module will study the historical development of Sparta (in both domestic and external affairs) from the seventh to early fourth centuries B.C. In doing so, it will also engage with the central issues that arise in historical study of Sparta: the peculiarly problematic nature of our evidence; the Spartan social, political, and military system; her subordinate populations; relations between Spartans and others both at home and abroad; the forces behind Sparta's rise and fall as a great power; and the development of the 'Spartan mirage' both in antiquity and in modern times. You will have one 2-hour lecture every week and one 2-hour seminar every other week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Masculinity and Citizenship in Greece and Rome 
   
  
    In this full-year module you’ll use literary and historical material to explore the idea of what it is to be a man and an accepted citizen in Ancient Greece and Rome. It explores how good citizens should behave and what they were expected to look like. You’ll also explore how they represented this citizenship to the rest of the world and how that changed over time. Incorporating elements of gender studies, topics to be covered include: homoeroticism and Athenian identity, dress and cultural identity, sexual invective, citizenship and empire, Roman representation in the provinces and women, politics and patronage. You’ll have three hours of seminars weekly.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Greek Tragedy: The Myth of Orestes on Stage in the 5th Century BC 
   
  
    This course is designed to serve as an introduction to Greek Tragedy in translation through the examination of one myth in detail: that of the house of Orestes. The course will focus on Aeschylus’ Oresteia, Sophocles’ Electra, Euripides’ Electra and Orestes. These texts contain a number of themes that are typical of tragedy as a whole: inherited guilt, ritual pollution, revenge, kin-killing and the pursuit of suppliants. Furthermore, the course will aim to set tragedy within its broader context, looking at two major areas. The first is the literary context of tragedy; how tragedy was informed by other poetic genres and, in particular, the development of the mythic tradition. Secondly, the module will consider the broader political, social and religious context of Greek tragedy. You will have one 1-hour lecture every week and one 1-hour seminar every fortnight for this module.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Free Will and Action 
   
  
    This module aims to examine some of the main philosophical issues concerning the nature and explanation of action and the requirements for free action and free will. You’ll conduct a study of some formative works and some recent contributions to the debates on these topics. Through a critical study of these topics, your skills in the analysis, evaluation, and presentation of arguments will also be enhanced. You’ll have two hours of lectures plus an hour-long seminar weekly.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Merleau-Ponty 
   
   
   
     Maurice Merleau-Ponty is associated with the philosophical movements of existentialism and 
    phenomenology. Almost all of his work is concerned with one central question: how should  
    we conceive of consciousness and the world? He holds that our current conceptions are  
    flawed; his aim is to show us this and provide new ones. You will focus on Merleau-Ponty’s  
    Phenomenology of Perception, where much of his discussion revolves around his notion of the body as subject, and consciousness as essentially embodied. The teaching will be delivered through a mixture of lectures and seminars.   
    
   
  
      
   
  
    An Introduction to Contemporary Metaethics 
   
  
    This module will take a detailed look at the main arguments and themes in contemporary metaethics. It will trace the development of contemporary debates in metaethics from their beginnnings in the work of G. E. Moore up to the most recent arguments between naturalism and non-naturalism, cognitivism and non-cognitivism. You'll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Philosophy of Art 
   
  
    This module aims to promote a deeper understanding of philosophical issues pertaining to art. By the end of the module, you should be able to discuss and evaluate different views of the expressive power of art, to explain certain current view on expression and representation, and to present the main contemporary viewpoints pertaining to the nature of artworks. You’ll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Marx 
   
  
    In this module you’ll be introduced to the theories of Karl Marx through selected texts from his works. Topics covers will include: alienation, the material conception of history, the labour theory of value and French political theory among others. You’ll gain an understanding of concepts essential for advanced study on this course.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Utilitarianism 
   
  
    This module will take a detailed look at one of the main topics of contemporary analytical political philosophy: the theory of distributive justice. This theory attempts to specify abstractly the conditions under which a distribution of benefits and burdens amongst a group of persons would be just. You will consider challenges to the legitimacy of any redistributive principle, and attempts to accommodate values such as responsibility and choice in different patterns of distribution. You’ll have a two hour lecture and one hour seminar each week.
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Buddhist Philosophy 
   
  
    The module will focus on a critical examination of core aspects of Buddhist thinking, with emphasis on some of its basic psychological, spiritual, and metaphysical conceptions. These include, in particular: the origin and nature of suffering, the no-self thesis, enlightenment, consciousness, experiential knowing, and the doctrine of Emptiness ( the lack of inherent nature in all things and impermanence). The module will focus particularly on N&acirc;g&acirc;rjuna’s philosophy of the ‘middle way’ and some modern commentaries on it. The module will approach Buddhism as a philosophical world-view, rather than as a religious one. The module will not be involved in detailed exegesis of ancient texts. When possible the module will try to link Buddhist conceptions to contemporary ideas about personhood, consciousness and the fundamental nature of reality. You will have a mixture of seminars and lectures for this module.