Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
   Compulsory  
    
  
    Introduction to German Studies 
   
   
   This year-long module provides an introduction to the study of German and is compulsory for most students of German. It covers the main fields of German Studies: literature, culture, history, linguistics, media and film. You will be introduced to the study skills required for academic study: critical and analytic skills, reading skills, presentation skills and writing skills. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Contemporary China  
   
   
    This is an introductory course designed to provide students with an overview of contemporary China and help students establish a foundation of knowledge and skills to pursue more advanced studies of China in their later years of study. You will examine a variety of topics such as Chinese economy and politics, security and foreign relations, and Chinese media since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949 with particular attention paid to the changes in China since 1978. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture and a one-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
   
   Plus:  
    
  
    German 1 
   
   
   Using up-to-date material from the German-speaking world this core module will help you improve your command of written and spoken German. Continuing with the four skills areas of A-level work (writing, reading, listening, and speaking) you will develop them further through a variety of exercises whilst gaining insights into contemporary German life, culture and politics. For this module you will have one 1-hour grammar lecture each week and three 1-hour tutorials per week where you will work in small groups usually led by German native speakers. In addition you are expected to undertake at least four hours of private study each week. 
   
  
      
   
      
    
   Plus Mandarin Chinese modules at the appropriate level (beginners', intermediate, advanced, or proficiency level).  
   Optional  
    
  
    Introduction to the Business and Economy of China 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the economy, business, institutions and economically-related political aspects of contemporary China with a focus on the reform period. You’ll gain an overview of macro- and micro- economic, institutional and political factors that affect business and development in China, as well as major economic sectors in China. Issues covered include: economic development, economic reform, exports and FDI, the financial and banking system, state and non-state firms, technology, major challenges including income inequalities, and the state’s role in the growth and management of the economy. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture and a one 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the Chinese Legal System 
   
   
    Studying this module you will gain an introduction to the origin, key elements and characteristics of the evolving Chinese legal system including the history of Chinese law, the organization of the P.R. China as a state and its constitutional laws, the law making process in China, the legal institutions and the Chinese court system, the criminal process, and the civil process and legal profession in China. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Reading German Literature 
   
  
    In this module you will be introduced to the critical reading and textual analysis of German narrative literature and poetry from the late 18th century to today. You will study two mid-length narrative texts and a selection of poems which represent key phases and aspects of German literary and cultural development from ‘Goethezeit’ to the post-1945 and contemporary period. In analysing and discussing a range of texts and authors, you will be introduced to key concepts and techniques of textual analysis, to the structures of narrative and poetry, and to selected themes and developments in literary criticism. The module combines one 1-hour introductory lecture per week with in-depth study in small tutorial groups (one 1-hour tutorial per week), in addition you will undertake four hours of private study per week. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Hitler and the Third Reich 
   
  
    This module will explore the period of National Socialism in Germany (1933-1945). You will be introduced to an outline of the historical context of this period and critically review the ideology and politics of the time with a focus on society and culture. You will evaluate original sources (in original and in translation) such as posters, speeches, newspapers and films. In addition, theoretical writings on select topics such as propaganda, ‘leader cult’, media, childhood, womanhood and ‘the other;’ will assist in your critical analysis. For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week in addition to four hours of private study. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Linguistics 1: The Sounds of German 
   
  
    This module investigates the sounds of German and how they can be described accurately (“phonetics and phonology”). Students will learn to transcribe German using the notation of the International Phonetic Association, and we will look in particular at aspects of German pronunciation that are hard to master because they are different to English or similar to French. We will also look at how foreign words (including English words) are integrated into the German sound system, and at regional variation in spoken German. Developing accurate listening and transcription skills will form a major part of the module. There will be a one hour lecture and a one hour workshop each week, in addition to four hours private study time. 
   
  
      
   
  
    Reading German Culture 
   
  
    In this module you will learn to analyse short literary and popular texts (including film) which portray life in the metropolis Berlin and represent  key phases in German historical and social development in the 20th century: the 1920s, the immediate post war-period, post-unification Berlin. Exploring cultural representations of urban life the course will address key questions such as: How do textual perceptions of the ‘big’ city reflect attitudes towards relationships conditioned by class, gender and race? For this module you will have one 2-hour seminars each week in addition to four hours of private study. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules   
  
  
   Compulsory  
   Either  
    
  
    German 2 
   
   
   This core module consolidates your proficiency in the four skill areas of German Language 1 (writing, reading, listening, and speaking) in order to develop these further. Using contemporary material this module is also tailor-made to prepare you for the period you will spend in a German-speaking country studying, working or teaching. It includes German CV writing, interview preparations, presentations, translation from and into German and advanced grammar work. For this module you will be taught in small groups, usually by German native speakers. You will have one 2-hour seminar and one 1- hour grammar tutorial each week in addition to a minimum of four hours of private study. 
   
  
      
   
      
   Plus Mandarin Chinese at the appropriate level (intermediate, advanced, proficiency or research level)  
   Optional   
  
    Media in Germany 
   
   
    The aim of this module is to explore the history of print and broadcasting in Germany from 1933 to  the 1990s, and investigate the relationship between media content and culture. You will develop a foundation in the key concepts of media studies and gain insight into the connection of media and ideology. For this module you will have one 2-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Literary Translation 
   
   
    This module explores theoretical approaches and practical problems in literary translation. You will study different approaches to translating texts and compose a translation of a text of your choice. You will have one 2-hour seminar and one 1-hour workshop per week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    New German Cinema 
   
   
   Between the mid 1960s and the mid 1980s West German cinema rose to new national and international success due to the work of a number of young directors who were commonly perceived as representatives of a "New" or "Young" German cinema. This module will analyse selected films from this period. You will be introduced to the individual styles of different directors (Fassbinder, Herzog, Wenders) as well as to their common thematic preoccupations. The analysis will aim to situate the "New German Cinema" within the contexts both of the development of the film industry and of contemporary social and political developments in West Germany. You will have one 2-hour seminar and one 1-hour workshop per week in addition to four hours of private study. 
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Fremdsprachen lernen und lehren 
   
   
    This module introduces you to some major theories of how languages are learned and to some approaches to how languages can be taught, particularly focussing on German and English. We will consider the differences between first and second language acquisition; whether there is a ‘best’ age to learn a foreign language; why some people learn languages more easily than others; and some particular problems for English-speaking learners of German and German-speaking learners of English. It will appeal to anyone with an interest in linguistics, as well as to those who might be considering teaching on the Year Abroad or in the future. For this module you will have one 2-hour seminar each week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to German Dialects 
   
   
    This module explores the various dialects spoken in Germany and other German-speaking areas. It examines the key linguistic features which can be used to identify a dialect, and explores the use of dialect, which has changed considerably over the past centuries, but particularly since 1945, and which also varies considerably regionally. It also looks at the interactions between the dialects and the standard language (‘High German’). For this module you will have one 1-hour lecture and one 1-hour seminar each week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    East Asian Business in the Global Economy 
   
   
    This module builds on the first semester module on the organization and globalization of business in the major economies of East Asia. Focussing on Japan, China and Korea, you will be able to identify characteristic features of East Asian business systems, the internationalization of various types of business systems and the trajectories of interaction between East Asian and north Atlantic businesses. This will involve the analysis of the emergence of distinctive national business systems, trends in globalisation and debates about global convergence, impacts of the 1997 East Asian financial crisis, financial liberalisation and flows of foreign direct investment in East Asia, Trade policies in East Asia and what they mean in Europe, government-business relations in East Asia, and the rise of 'collective management'. For this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Rise of Modern China 
   
   
    In this module you will study the history of China from the 1840s, through to the establishment of the People’s Republic in 1949. You will focus in particular on the ways in which Chinese society responded to the arrival of ‘modernity’ in the form of the Western powers and Japan throughout the period in question, but also how different groups in China tried to remould or redefine China as a ‘modern’ nation-state and society. In this module you will have a two-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Social Change and Public Policy in China’s Reform Era 
   
   
    In this module you will learn how the Chinese central government has responded to socio-economic changes by issuing a number of key policy initiatives, most notably in the field of social security, health, education, labour, innovation and the environment. In the first part of the module participants will be sensitized about the interplay between socio-economic transformation, administrative reform and public policy making during China's reform era (1978).  In the second part of the module students will learn about the expanded spaces for participatory policy making in China by analysing case studies in all five substantive policy fields. As part of their course assignments students will be asked to write one 3,000 word essay and put insights into practice by developing group presentations on a selected public policy. This optional module will provide a socially relevant policy curriculum and help students develop necessary skills for a democratic practice of policy inquiry. For this module you will have one 2-hour lecture each week. 
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Three Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
   Year spent abroad. Please see the Department of German Studies Year Abroad page.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules
   
   
  
  
   Compulsory  
  
    German 3 
   
   
    This core module aims to consolidate the high level of language skills you will have acquired during the time spent in a German-speaking country in Year 3.  In classes taught by native speakers of German, you will further refine your advanced proficiency in written and spoken German. Contemporary texts and discussions of up-to-date topics are a key feature of this module and you will be encouraged to build on the knowledge and skills acquired during your year abroad. For this module you will have two 1-hour seminars each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Translation from German I 
   
   
    This core module will enhance your practical command and effective understanding of written and German and English on the basis of your progress during your year abroad, through translation of a variety of German texts and passages. This module will develop your translation skills towards professional standards for translation into English. For this module you will have one 2-hour seminar each week working in small groups in addition to four hours of private study.   
   
  
      
   
      
   Plus Mandarin Chinese modules at the appropriate level (advanced, proficiency or research level)  
   Optional   
  
    Translation and Linguistic Exchange 
   
   
    This module offers in-depth discussion of grammatical, lexical and idiomatic aspects of German and English as well as issues of translation, register and cultural difference. You will be taught primarily through the medium of translation, both from and into German, using a variety of texts and passages on a range of topics and in a range of registers. You will work in a team with exchange students who are German native speakers and this will foster dialogue about linguistic and translation issues as well as general cultural exchange. You will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    German Studies Dissertation (10 credits) 
   
   
    This module involves the in-depth study of a topic in German Studies resulting in a dissertation written in German. You will write a 4,000 word essay in German or English on a topic of your particular interest and expertise (normally related to a German module which you have taken in your second or final year). In addition to extensive private study you will have two 1-hour seminars per semester followed by five individual meetings with your supervisor. This module is also available as a 20 credit version where you will write a 7,000 word essay in German or English.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Culture and Society in the Weimar Republic 
   
   
    The Weimar Republic (1919-1933) was one of the most fascinating and culturally productive periods of German history, but it was equally ridden by crises and violent conflicts. This module aims to introduce central issues in the literary and social developments of Weimar Germany. You will study a wide range of materials (literary texts, film, aesthetic and political programmes) to analyse key features of the period. Topics will include the impact of the Great War, developments in the press and the cinema, political confrontations, cabaret, and unemployment. You will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar per week in addition to four hours of private study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Recent Women's Writing 
   
   
    In this module you will explore a number of novels and stories written since 1960 by German-speaking women writers. You will also study selected texts on the cultural, political and social contexts of the rise of the second wave feminism in the 1970’s, the changing position of women in the FRG, GDR and Austria, and the increasing awareness of ethnic pluralities. You will compare texts and contexts and explore a variety of reading strategies developed in feminist criticism. For this module you will have one 2-hour and one 1-hour seminar each week in addition to extensive independent study.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Chinese Film and Literature 
   
   
    In this module you will first examine the close linkage between literature and cinema in China and the consequences and then explore trends in modern Chinese literature and cinema, with a primary focus on different genres and themes developed since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949. By placing Chinese literature and film within their cultural, social and historical contexts, you will analyse, interpret and appreciate such phenomena. You will analyse individual texts in translation and films with English subtitles to increase your awareness of the major developments in literature and film as they are embedded in the wider changes in contemporary China. You will have one 3-hour practical class each week studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Government and Politics of Taiwan and Hong Kong: Alternatives to Leninism 
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn about the two countries that choose a different pathway from mainland China whilst still under the leadership of the communist party. You’ll address a number of questions in order to gain a good understanding of the processes of these unique countries and be able to critically reflect on their differences with mainland China. You’ll have two hours of lectures and a one-hour seminar weekly studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Media & Communications in Globalising China 
   
   
    Media systems are critically important in any modern political system, and this module leads you directly to the heart of understanding how the media relates to contemporary society and politics in the People’s Republic of China. It introduces you to the unprecedented transformation in contemporary Chinese media and communication in the context of economic reforms, development of new media technologies and globalisation through a two hour weekly lecture.