Modules  
  The modules we offer are inspired by the research interests of our staff and as a result, may change from year to year. The following list is therefore subject to change but should give you a flavour of the modules we offer.  
  
   Typical Year One Modules  
  
  
  
    Spanish 1 
   
   
    This module will combine revision of grammar with intensive exposure to a variety of types and registers of written and spoken Spanish, concentrating on appropriate thematic areas. It will consolidate and build on basic written, aural and oral language skills through spending 3 hours per week in lectures and seminars.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Literature in Spanish 
   
   
    You’ll read a series of key texts from Spain and Spanish America. Its purpose is to impart an essential body of literary-historical and cultural knowledge relating to the main periods, genres and conventions of literature in Spanish from the Middle Ages to the modern period. You’ll spend two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Spain and Portugal in the Twentieth Century 
   
   
    In this module you’ll study the evolution of Spanish and Portuguese history, politics and culture from 1898 to the present day. You’ll be encouraged to draw links between the Portuguese and Spanish experiences, and place both countries’ experience of the twentieth century within the broader context of European and wider global history in this period. Particular emphasis will be placed upon the development of both countries from a (perceived) position of ‘difference’ and ‘backwardness’ to relatively prosperous, economically developed and culturally diverse members of the European Union. You’ll spend 2 hours in classes each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to the History of Modern Latin America 
   
   
    In this module you will be introduced to the main patterns of Latin American political, economic and social history between the late colonial period and the mid-to-late 20th Century which will give you a thorough grounding of the major issues, themes and forces that have shaped the societies in the region. In one part of the module you will study the history of the Spanish-speaking America and in the other half consider the history of Brazil and aspects such as the various patterns of change and development of the region and political radicalism. For this module you will have a one 1-hour lecture and a one 1-hour seminar each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Mandarin Chinese for Beginners 
   
   
    This module assumes you have no prior knowledge of the language. You will then be taught to speak, read, write and understand materials in the target language relating to everyday situations. The basic structure of the language is introduced through topics related to giving and requesting personal information. You’ll be taught through a two-hour lecture and one-hour practical class each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Introduction to Business and Economy of China 
   
   
    This module introduces you to the economy, business, institutions and economically-related political aspects of contemporary China with a focus on the reform period. You will gain an overview of macro and micro-economic environment, institutional and political factors that affect business and development in China, as well as major economic sectors in China. You’ll have a weekly two-hour lecture to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
      
   
      
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
   Typical Year Two Modules  
  
  
  
    Spanish 2 
   
   
    This module will combine revision and extension of grammar with intensive exposure to a variety of types and registers of written and spoken Spanish, concentrating on appropriate thematic areas. It will consolidate and build on basic written, aural and oral language skills, and include preparatory work for the Year Abroad. For this module you’ll have a one 1-hour and one 2-hour seminar as well as a one 1-hour lecture each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Mandarin Chinese for Intermediate Level 2a 
   
   
    This module assumes a basic knowledge of the language at approximately GCSE standard - it is, however, recognised that the GCSE may have been taken several years ago and the courses are designed to revise and develop basic structures. The four skills of reading, listening, speaking and writing are expanded to enable participation in discussions with reasonable fluency and accuracy. You’ll have a two-hour seminar and one-hour practical each week to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Mandarin Chinese for Intermediate Level 2b 
   
   
    This module develops the speaking and comprehension skills obtained in stage 2a. There is emphasis on extracting and processing authentic language and instruction in the target language is increasingly used. You’ll have a two-hour seminar and one-hour practical each week to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Modern Spanish and Spanish American Literature and Film 
   
   
    This module explores a cultural period in the Hispanic world characterised by profound social change and the emergence of major world-figures of modern art (e.g. Picasso). It is structured around key literary and artistic movements from Spain and Spanish America from the early nineteenth century to the latter part of the twentieth, movements such as Romanticism, Realism, Symbolism-Decadence/modernismo, the Avant-garde, and Modernism. You’ll spend four hours per week in lectures.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Hispanic Visual Culture 
   
   
    In this module you will be given and general introduction to cinema and painting in the Hispanic and Lusophone worlds. In the first semester you will be introduced to painting in Spain, Portugal, and Latin America from the late 15th century to the early 19th century with an emphasis on how to analyse paintings and understand the styles and contexts from which paintings emerge. In the 2nd semester you will examine contemporary cinema from Spain and Latin America addressing questions of style, socio-historical context and narrative context. In this module you will have a one 2-hour lecture and a one 2-hour workshop for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Metropolis, Empire and Republics 
   
   
    This module examines the evolution of Spain, Portugal and their American colonies in the four centuries of Iberian colonialism between 1943 and the movements for independence in Latin America in the 19th Century.  In the first half of the module you will consider the development and nature of medieval and Renaissance Iberia and the second half of the module examines the nature of society in pre-Columbian America, after which students are introduced to the processes of discovery, conquest and early colonisation. For this module you will have a combination of lectures and seminars each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Environment and Development in China I 
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn about the physical, human and geographical issues that have occurred in recent years due to China’s development policies over the past century. You’ll explore these in the context of political, economic and social changes. Topics covered include air and water pollution, the impact of industrialisation and the evolution of the environmental legal system among others. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Social Change and Public Policy in China's Reform Era 
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn how the Chinese central government has responded to socio-economic changes through key public policies since 1978. You’ll explore contemporary debates surrounding China’s recent modernisation drive. You’ll have two hours per week of lectures studying this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Rise of Modern China 
   
   
    This module covers the history of China from the 1840s, through to the establishment of the People’s Republic in 1949. It looks at social, cultural, political and economic developments in this period from a variety of angles and approaches. You’ll spend around two hours per week in lectures and seminars studying for this module.  
   
  
      
   
   
  
      
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Year Three  
  In your third year of study you will spend the academic year abroad in Spain or Spanish America and China. You will be supported by our Year Abroad officer in preparation for this period in Year Two. You have the option to undertake study at a University, do a work placement or work as an English language teaching assistant.  
  For more information, please visit the Department of Spanish, Portuguese and Latin American Studies year abroad webpage and the School of Contemporary Chinese Studies webpage.  
  
   Typical Year Four Modules  
  
  
  
    Spanish 3 
   
   
    This is a module for all students of Spanish language, and will consist of 3 hours per week of oral work and writing skills. Recognising that significant progress will have been made in colloquial and informal language skills during the Year Abroad, this module intends to introduce you to a more formal and sophisticated register of spoken and written Spanish using print, off-air and internet sources.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Advanced Spanish Translation 
   
   
    This module offers coaching and practice in high-level translation from Spanish to English. You will work with a variety of texts over the semester, exploring different registers in Spanish and English, and equivalences between source and target languages. You will be required to reflect on the process of translation through annotations on specific translation decisions which will be part of the given task each week. You will also be given a brief for each translation and asked to research the target publication/context for their translation and specify ways in which the target context may differ from the original.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Inter Faculty Mandarin Chinese 3a 
   
   
    This module develops the speaking and productive skills of language learning to enable you to function effectively at an intermediate level. The module stresses the productive skills, particularly spoken and written ones. You’ll have a two-hour seminar and one-hour practical each week in the target language to study for this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Inter Faculty Mandarin 4b 
   
   
    This module develops the four skills of reading, listening, speaking and writing to enable students to gather and process information accurately and quickly through discussion, from radio and TV and from written sources.  
   
  
      
   
  
    Spanish American Narrative 
   
   
    You’ll explore the work of key writers in 20th Century Spanish America, all of whom bear the recognisable imprint of literary Modernism. You will closely study two writers of what has become known as the ‘Boom’(namely, Gabriel Garc&iacute;a M&aacute;rquez and Julio Cort&aacute;zar); and three precursors of that generation (Jorge Luis Borges, Alejo Carpentier and Juan Rulfo). The module will examine the ways in which they make use of myth, the fantastic and experimental narrative techniques to write about history, traditional, popular and/or mass culture, gender and sexuality. You will have a one 2-hour class each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    The Radicalisation of Nationalism in Modern Latin America: Cuban Revolution in Continental Perspective 
   
   
    This module is concerned with the emergence, nature and evolution of the Cuban Revolution.  You will consider the Revolution in question within a wider historical and ideological context: the Latin American tradition of an increasingly radical nationalism. Dating from the 19th and early 20th century this is a time when there was a need to engage in serious and collective nation-building. The module therefore examines how the Cuban Revolution went on to influence the subsequent radicalisation of that tradition, shaping a range of political manifestation. For this module you will have a one 2-hour class each week.  
   
  
      
   
  
    China from Revolution to the Socialist Era 
   
   
    In this module you’ll learn China under the communist party in the pre-reform era of 1949-1978. You’ll examine how China was organized and governed, changes in rural and urban society, the family, the economy and the Chinese workplace under Mao Zedong's CCP. You’ll have an hour a week of both lecture and seminar learning during this module.  
   
  
      
   
  
    China Through Film and Literature 
   
   
    In this module you will first examine the close linkage between literature and cinema in China and the consequences and then explore trends in modern Chinese literature and cinema, with a primary focus on different genres and themes developed since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949. By placing Chinese literature and film within their cultural, social and historical contexts, you will analyse, interpret and appreciate such phenomena. You will analyse individual texts in translation and films with English subtitles to increase your awareness of the major developments in literature and film as they are embedded in the wider changes in contemporary China.  You will have one 3 hour practical class each week studying this module.