Modules  
  A full list of available modules can be found in the Law postgraduate module guide.  
  Core module  
 
   International Criminal Law 
  
  
   An introduction to international criminal law issues, with particular emphasis on institutions (such as Nuremberg and Tokyo IMTs, the ad hoc Tribunals and the International Criminal Court) as well as substantive and procedural aspects of international criminal law.  
   The module focuses on the institutional developments in international criminal law as well as the definition and application of the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and aggression.   
   Principles of liability, defences and elements of international criminal procedure will also be covered.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop students’ analytical skills in relation of the function, scope and operation of the international criminal justice system and its likely future development, as well as to enable students to apply the law to the various situations  
   
  
 
     
  
  Qualifying module options  
 
   An Uncensored History of International Law 
  
  
   This module consists of an examination of the major theoretical approaches to Public International Law.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the diverse theoretical approaches to public international law  
    discern the influence of these approaches on the practical development of public international law  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Detention and Imprisonment in the International Criminal Justice System 
  
  
   From the history of detention and imprisonment at the post-World War II International Military Tribunals, the course will progress to look at the penal regimes of the contemporary international criminal courts and tribunals, including the ICTY, ICTR, MICT, SCSL and ICC.   
   Students will learn about the systems for and conditions in international remand detention and analyse the complaints and disciplinary procedures and oversight mechanisms operating within these international facilities.   
   Students will also learn about life for international prisoners post-conviction, through an exploration of the various systems used to enforce international sentences of imprisonment.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the systems used to detain and punish persons accused of and convicted for the commission of international crimes by international criminal courts  
    encourages students to critically analyse the custodial systems, standards and oversight mechanisms operating in the international criminal justice system  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Humanitarian Law 
  
  
   The module will examine the essential elements of international humanitarian law – conceptual, institutional and substantive.  
   The course will develop from an introduction and historical overview of international humanitarian law to an examination of the sources of the law. Candidates will then examine the form of armed conflicts in which these laws operate, paying particular attention to such issues as the classification and treatment of combatants, targeting rules and weaponry usage.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce students to the essential elements of international humanitarian law - conceptual, institutional and substantive – in an interactive and flexible manner  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   International Law on the Use of Force 
  
  
   This module looks at principles and laws governing unilateral and multilateral resort to force by states under the United Nations Charter and in customary international law.  
   Instances where force is permissible will be considered as well as the more controversial claims to use force.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop an understanding of this specialist area of public international law  
    analyse and evaluate the contribution of the legal and political processes to the control and regulation of the use of force  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights and Criminal Justice 
  
  
   A broadly-based introduction to the philosophical foundations of human rights and criminal justice, emphasising the moral and political underpinnings of legal rules, doctrines and principles.  
   The module first tackles perennial conceptual and methodological issues relating to the nature of “philosophical” inquiry and the challenges of scepticism. Thereafter, the model reconsiders key issues and questions in contemporary debates surrounding human rights and criminal justice through the contrasting lenses of two rival philosophical perspectives, utilitarianism and liberal deontology.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    introduce lawyers and others with limited or no formal philosophical background to key themes, ideas and arguments in moral and political philosophy  
    develop advanced skills of conceptual analysis and critical thinking  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Post-conflict Situations and International Law 
  
  
   This module will examine the international legal problems arising from international involvement in post-conflict situations.  
   While there are established courses and literature on the jus ad bellum (use of force) and the jus in bello (international humanitarian law), the idea and content of a jus post bellum has only in recent years been the subject of intense debate.   
   International interventions in Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan, along with the development of peacekeeping to include peacebuilding (in Cambodia and the Congo for instance), have led to the on-going development of a legal framework to govern the post-conflict stage.   
   This module will endeavour to uncover, understand and evaluate the applicable law, which draws on elements of peacekeeping law, human rights law, humanitarian law, and refugee law, as well as general principles of international law, and emerging ideas such as transitional justice and rule of law.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    explore in detail a crucial and changing area of international law  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Principles of Public International Law 
  
  
   The module is primarily concerned with those customary and treaty rules governing relations between States. This module aims to give candidates a thorough grounding in the principles of PIL. The basic topics include: nature of international law, sources, actors in the international legal system, jurisdiction and state responsibility.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop knowledge and understanding of the fundamental principles of Public International Law; to develop an understanding of the structure and development of the international legal system and to understand its wider political context  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   United Nations Law 
  
  
   This module examines the international institutional law and general international law governing the United Nations, including the central organs (for example the Security Council and General Assembly), subsidiary organs (such as the UNEP and the UNDP), and the specialized agencies (for example the WHO, UNESCO, ICAO).   
   It considers:  
   
    the UN’s constitutional basis  
    its legal personality and powers  
    membership and budgetary matters  
    representation and decision making  
    sanctions regimes  
    the UN's military options  
    issues of responsibility, accountability and immunities  
    the UN’s contribution to the development and enforcement of international law  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide a detailed knowledge of this fundamental area of specialisation in the field of public international law  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.