Modules  
  Taught modules (compulsory)  
  
   Fundamentals of Biomolecular Science (D24BT7)  This module will provide students with a firm understanding of the basic chemistry behind the properties of biomolecules - properties which underpin their behaviour in vivo - and their technology and some of the techniques used to characterise their size. Students will learn about biomolecular structure, properties and function relevant to industry or in a biomedical environment.  
   Basic Laboratory Techniques (D24AM3) This module will provide students with a firm understanding of the principles of the basic biochemical and molecular biological laboratory skills required for biomolecular technology, ranging from the preparation and handling of solutions, safe handling of microorganisms, DNA analysis and statistical analysis of data.  
   Industrial and Biomedical Macromolecules (D24BT1)  This module will provide students with a firm understanding of the structure, properties and function of industrially and biomedically important macromolecules under a variety of conditions (solution, colloid, glassy state, crystal). Students will learn about biomolecular structure, properties and function of relevance to an industrial and biomedical setting.  
   Genetic Analysis and Bioinformatics (D24BT9)  The methods available for the analysis of genome structure and function are constantly developing. This module will provide students with a fundamental understanding of the key methods used (PCR, hybridisation, cloning and trancriptomics and proteomics). However Bioinformatics, the managing, utilisation and analysis of biomolecular/ molecular biological data, is increasingly important to biomolecular scientists as the volume of data increases. Biomolecular scientists need to be familiar with the international databases, and be able to retrieve relevant data and use programmes to analyse it for biologically significant features. A familiarity with bioinformatics is now as important as any laboratory skill and bioinformatics is also emerging as an important career opportunity. The module will equip students with the basic skills required in this field.  
   Antibody Biotechnology (D24BT4)  This module will provide the students with an understanding of how antibody biotechnology can be applied to solve problems in an industrial and biomedical context.  
   Structural Biology (D24BT8)  This module is aimed at equipping students with a firm understanding and appreciation of the techniques used to characterise biomolecular structure in the solid state and in solution. Students will learn about advanced biophysical techniques of relevance to an industry and a biomedical environment.  
   Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology (D245F2) This module focuses on protein production and protein engineering. It considers the biological factors that affect protein production and looks at the advantages and disadvantages of a range of different protein expression systems, including bacterial, yeast, fungal, viral and transfection of eukaryotic cell lines. Detailed examples of protein engineering of food-relevant proteins are considered in the context of the legislative framework governing the use of GM material.  
   Polysaccharide and Drug Delivery Biotechnology (D24BT5)  Students will learn how knowledge of enzyme and polysaccharide biotechnology can be applied to solve problems in an industrial and biomedical setting, including drug delivery.  
  
  More module information is available in the University's module catalogue.    
  Industrial and laboratory placement  
  The three month industrial placement aims at developing students' ability to research a subject of industrial or biomedical relevance in depth and gives a full appreciation of what is required by modern industry.  
  The placement takes place May-August, and students are placed either locally or nationally. The school’s industrial placement supervisor visits each student during their placement to ensure adequate progress is being made. All students are required to submit a written report. Where appropriate, special arrangements can be made for non-UK students to undertake this placement in their normal country of residence.