Modules  
 
   Modules Include: 
  
  
   
  
  
  
    Research Methods and Resources 
   
  
    You will be introduced to the necessary skills and resources for postgraduate research alongside methodological and theoretical issues in theology and church history. Topics studied may include IT skills, library resources, the development of arguments, formatting and referencing and the relationship between academic research and religious commitment. You will be assessed through a 4000-word essay and a 1000-word account of the research undertaken. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Rabbinic Judaism 
   
  
    This module will allow you to study rabbinic Judaism from its formation to the coming of Islam. Starting with an overview of the earliest beginnings of the Rabbinic movement and its accommodation to Roman imperial power, you will go on to consider the classical period of rabbinic Judaism, with a focus first on the Palestinian rabbis, then the Babylonians, before finishing with an assessment of Quranic evidence of rabbis in Arabia. By the end of the module, you will have developed an understanding of rabbinic Judaism throughout Late Antiquity and the early Middle Ages, of the diversity of rabbinic cultures, and of the interplay between Imperial and Late Roman, Sassanian, Muslim and Rabbinic cultures. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Modern Jewish Thought 
   
   
   
     This module aims to present a separate status for Jewish thought within modernity as an interesting alternative to Christian and secular models of thought. You will focus on the creative impact of Jewish thinkers on the development of modernity through their renegotiations and redefinitions of the most crucial opposition between Athens and Jerusalem or, in their own rendering, between Yaphet and Shem.   
    
    
     
    
   
  
      
   
  
    The Israelite Gospels 
   
  
    In this module you will consider a range of texts which simultaneously proclaim a belief in Jesus and endorse ritual purity from the first to the seventh centuries C. E. The religious movements constituted by the text’s audiences are placed in broader cultural contexts and defined in relation to gentile Christianity and rabbinic Judaism. Some of the texts studied may include John’s Revelation, the Gospel of Matthew, and the Clementine Homilies, as well as rabbinic and patristic heresiology. By the end of the module you will have an understanding of a variety of Late Ancient texts and how they continue to exercise influence today. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Jewish Theology and Philosophy: From Philo to Levinas 
   
  
    This module will provide an overview of the most important theological and philosophical ideas and arguments that Jewish thought developed from the Hellenistic period of Philo of Alexandria to the postmodern times of Emmanuel Levinas. You will combine historical and speculative approaches through the perspective of the ‘history of ideas’, acquainting yourself with an alternative non-Christian model of theologico-philosophical reasoning from the sources of Islam, developed in intense dialogue with Christian, Muslim and secular cultures throughout the ages. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Early Christian Writings: Outside the Canonical Collection 
   
  
    You will be introduced to four or six (according the number of credits permitted) documents from early followers of Jesus in their entirety, with a focus on the growing distinctions during the period between Judaism and Christianity. This will lead to an examination of how these documents present the history of various early communities and their theological concerns, and how they can be used in theological understanding today. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
    Directed Reading 
   
  
    This module aims to provide groundwork for later research for students intending to continue their studies to MPhil/ Ph.D. level. You will, in conjunction with a supervisor, pursue a plan of guided reading distinct both from the area of your dissertation and, usually, topics covered on other modules. The module will enable you to develop several key skills, including, amongst others: library resource skills, the compilation of bibliographies, the planning of independent study with long-term goals in mind, critical self-awareness, and the communication and development of sophisticated argument. 
    
    
   
  
      
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
  
  For more details on our modules, please see the Module Catalogue.