Modules  
  Taught modules are compulsory. Exceptions will be made for students who have already completed certain modules as part of their undergraduate degrees. (All modules are subject to change)  
  
   Industrial and Biomedical Macromolecules (D24BT1) This module will provide students with a firm understanding of the structure, properties and function of industrially and biomedically important macromolecules under a variety of conditions (solution, colloid, glassy state, crystal). Students will learn about biomolecular structure, properties and function of relevance to an industrial and biomedical setting.  
   Physical Chemistry of Molecules (D245F7)  This module will provide students with a firm understanding of the basic chemistry behind the properties of biomolecules - properties which underpin their behaviour in vivo - and their technology , and some of the techniques used to characterise their size. Students will learn about biomolecular structure, properties and function relevant to industry or in a biomedical environment.  
   Antibody Biotechnology (D24BT4) This module will provide the students with an understanding of how antibody biotechnology can be applied to solve problems in an industrial and biomedical context.  
   Polysaccharide and Drug Delivery Biotechnology (D24BT5) Students will learn how knowledge of enzyme and carbohydrate-based biotechnology can be applied to solve problems in an industrial and biomedical setting, including drug delivery.  
   Structural Biology (D24BT8)  To equip students with a firm appreciation of the techniques used to characterise biomolecular structure in solid state and in solution form.  
   Project Management (N14C15) This module introduces fundamental concepts in project management. Students will gain understanding of the scope and variety of project types, understand key variables in project management and learn methods, techniques and approaches that are important in successfully managing projects to meet objectives in a wide range of contexts.  
   Creative Problem Solving (N14G01) Students will be encouraged to develop an understanding of entrepreneurial creativity through theoretical analysis and the use of creative problem solving techniques. The module will enable students to generate, evaluate and apply new ideas and concepts within a business planning process.  
   Finance and Accounting (N14G02) Many entrepreneurs are concerned about a lack of competence and understanding in accounting and finance issues related to their business or business plan. This modules aims to provide an understanding of basic accounting principles and analysis as well as the various sources of finance available to entrepreneurs, and the uses to which they are best applied.  
   Marketing for Entrepreneurs (N14G03) This module is designed to provide students from a non-business background with a grounding in marketing, focussing on the application of marketing in entrepreneurial type businesses.  
   Innovation Management (N14G05) Designed to help students to understand the knowledge and skills required to manage innovation by considering a number of different perspectives: industrial perspectives, innovation within an organisation, and finally, innovation from a managerial perspective.  
   Science, Technology, Arts and Business (N14G06) Students are introduced to the importance of, and the processes involved in, the commercial exploitation of science and technology. Students will develop their own business concept.  
  
  Further details of modules can be found in our module catalogue.   
  
   Industrial and Laboratory Placement with Project Dissertation  
  
  The three month industrial placement aims at developing students' ability to research a subject of industrial or biomedical relevance in depth and gives a full appreciation of what is required by modern industry. Students can also consider industrial placements requiring a management project, and can do their placement in a University setting so long as it has a strong industrial focus.