Modules  
  There are 180 credits in the Mediterranean archaeology MA. All MA students will follow the core module The Connecting and Corrupting Sea: Themes in Mediterranean Archaeology and will choose three more modules from those offered. They will conclude their study with a dissertation. The modules offered include:  
  The Connecting and Corrupting Sea: Themes in Mediterranean Archaeology (30 credits)  
  This is the core module for the course and it provides a general background to Mediterranean archaeology. It explores the key themes that unite the societies of the Mediterranean World, laying the foundation for a broad understanding of their archaeology across the centuries.  
  The module is structured around a number of broad topics which are illustrated by case studies. The themes chosen, such as pastoralism, trade and exchange, islands, colonisation, state formation and urbanisation and of course the Mediterranean Sea itself – the ‘corrupting’ and connecting sea, are at the centre of intellectual debate and the module will equip students for the more specialised option modules.  
  Prehistory of Greece and Italy: the making of the Mediterranean World (30 credits)  
  Greece and Italy are at the heart of the Mediterranean, but they are also protagonists in its history and prehistory. This module explores the prelude to the Classical and Hellenistic world, the prehistory of Greece and Italy from the early Neolithic to the early first millennium BC. Particular attention will be paid to the spread of farming, early Metallurgy, the Minoan and Mycenaean civilisations and their relations with the West Mediterranean, Bronze Age lake dwellings and Terramare in Italy, the introduction of writing, the Dark Age of Greece and the Protovillanovan of Italy.  The Greek Mediterranean: the Archaic, Classical and Hellenistic periods (30 credits)  
  The Greek Mediterranean module will provide a thematic presentation and critical discussion of the Archaic, Classical and Hellenistic periods (700 BC-30 BC). Different archaeological aspects will be emphasised, using a number of examples from various areas, where the Greek world expanded. The spatial overview and assessment of the Greek culture in the Mediterranean will also be presented, providing the template in which different themes will be analysed. Some of the major topics that will be covered include Athens and Democracy, Alexander’s legacy, Olympic and other athletic Games, Greek Art and Society, Trade and Contacts, and Greeks at War.  
  The use of specific case studies, research questions and particular sites will emphasise the various aspects of the Greek culture and will reveal its character and impact on its development as well as on neighbouring regions. The aim is to offer a general outlook of the Greek culture and the way it developed throughout the Mediterranean.  
  The Romans in the Mediterranean (30 credits)  
  This module will look at the archaeological evidence for the Roman period in Italy and the Mediterranean from 300 BC to AD 550. This is a period that saw Rome develop from a regional power in central Italy to one that dominated the Mediterranean, before undergoing profound change in the late Roman period. The archaeological record for the period reflects major social and economic shifts and also produced some of the most iconic ancient monuments and sites of the Mediterranean.  
  As well as examining the archaeological evidence for the period, the module also takes a critical look at how archaeologists have created and studied that evidence. Recent research has argued that the idea of a uniform “Romanised” Mediterranean is misleading and that archaeologists should be seeking a more nuanced picture that takes account of the multiple identities of the peoples that lived around its shores.  
  Maritime Archaeology in the Mediterranean (30 credits)  
  Before there were shepherds or farmers, there were sailors. Before people lived in villages, made pottery, could write or had metallurgy they could cross the Aegean. As a result, understanding the sea, and peoples’ relationship to it, is key to understanding the development of communities and civilisations in the Mediterranean.  
  The module charts the history and development of maritime archaeology as a discipline in the Mediterranean. It has a wide chronological range spanning the first evidence of seafaring around 9000 BC, the development of complex maritime trade during the Bronze Age, the role of the oared warships in the rise of Athens from the 5th century BC, through to the establishment of Roman naval dominance by the close of the 1st century BC. Major maritime projects are examined including the excavation of a 14th century BC shipwreck– the Uluburun - off Turkey, the spectacular recovery of the 4th century BC Kyrenia Ship off Cyprus, and the discovery of extensive sunken remains at Alexandria in Egypt. Current University of Nottingham projects at Pavlopetri in Greece, examining the oldest submerged town in the world, and the survey of the Battle of the Egadi Islands, off the coast of Sicily, provide detailed case studies further highlighting the major contribution maritime archaeology can make to our knowledge of the ancient Mediterranean world.  
  Dissertation (60 credits)  
  The dissertation (15,000-word long) will be an independent research project on a chosen subject from an array of themes related to the Mediterranean archaeology, under the supervision of a member of staff.