Modules  
  You will study two modules each taken over a six month period. The first module starts in September and the second in March. Each module has a value of 30 credits and represents 300 hours of study, including formal teaching, independent study, revision and the preparation of assessments. The modules are assessed by a combination of examination and project work or course work.  The first module you will study is:  
  
  Ergonomics Application in the Workplace 
  
  
  This module provides a broad overview of the discipline of ergonomics and practical guidance for applying ergonomics techniques. 
  
 
     
  
  You will then have a choice to take one module from the three modules:  
  
  Ergonomic Methods 
  
  
  This module teaches students about the methods commonly used in ergonomics investigations including questionnaire design, interviewing, experimental design and statistics. Students are also introduced to methods within the professional practice of ergonomics including problem identification. 
  
 
     
  
  
  Ergonomics in Work Organisations 
  
  
  This module covers the topics relating to the practice of ergonomics within an organisation and includes topics such as job design, motivation, stress, teamwork, safety management systems, human error predication, socio-technical systems and social psychological aspects of work.  
  
 
     
  
  
  Practical Ergonomics Investigation  
  
 
   A practical piece of work usually undertaken by the student in their workplace. The module is designed to be taken by employees in any organisation who can apply ergonomics in their work. The candidates will apply the materials and ideas from previous ergonomics investigation of value to their organisation.
   
  
 
     
  
  
 A practical piece of work undertaken by the student in their workplace.
  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.  
  Each module is offered over a 26-week span once a year.  
  Normally you will study two modules in one year - most students will gain their postgraduate qualification in one year.  Students usually transfer to the MSc in Applied Ergonomics and Human Factors (Distance Learning).  
  Once you have obtained the postgraduate certificate in Applied Ergonomics and Human Factors, this counts as 60 credits towards the MSc Applied Ergonomics and Human Factors (Distance Learning) if you wish to continue your studies.  
  For more details on our modules, please see the Module Catalogue.