Modules  
  A full list of available modules can be found in our Politics and International Relations postgraduate module guide  
  Core modules  
 
   Dissertation: MA Politics and Contemporary History 
  
  
   This module covers the research and writing of a substantive dissertation of 16,000 words ,combining aspects of both politics and contemporary history.   
   The research programme will have been designed in the second semester. In this module the student implements the agreed research programme and writes the dissertation.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    allow students to write a substantive dissertation on a subject chosen in conjunction with their supervisor   
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Design, Practice and Ethics 
  
  
   This module focuses on the analytical, practical and ethical organisation of social science research.   
   The analytical organisation is often referred to as ‘research design’ and will constitute the bulk of the content of this module. Research design consists of choices necessary to transform a research question into actual research. These choices pertain to strategies and modes of case selection, observation methods, data collection and modes of analysis.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    familiarise students with diagnosing and evaluating elements of research design in existing research  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   The Making of Political Science 
  
  
   This module provides students with an understanding of the main theories and concepts employed in political science, as well as the history of the discipline. These may include institutional, structural, behavioural, rational choice and interpretative approaches.  
   In particular, the module focuses on the main theoretical approaches in political science that underpin comparative explanation, as well as the methods of comparison. This module provides a platform for further study in comparative politics.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    provide an understanding of the main theories and concepts employed in political science  
   
  
 
     
  
  
  Core modules from the School of Humanities  
  
   Research Methods in History  
  
  Core modules from the School of Law  
  
   Fundamentals of Quantitative Analysis  
  
  Core modules from the School of Sociology and Social Policy  
  
   Foundations in Qualitative Methods  
   Philosophy of Research - Social Science   
  
  Optional but restricted core modules  
  Group 1: Students must take 20 credits from the subject specific modules offered by the ESRC DTC.  
  Group 2: Students must choose a further 20 credits from a list of approved MA modules offered by the School of History.   
  
   Exploring English Identity   
   Foreign Policy and Appeasement,1933-39   
   Heresy and Religious Dissent in the Middle Ages  
   Latin and Palaeography   
   Memory and Social Change in Modern Europe and Beyond   
   (Mis)Perceptions of the Other: From Savages and Barbarians to the Exotic and Erotic  
   Power and Authority in the Medieval World   
   The 1960s in Europe and America: Social and Cultural Change  
  
  Please note that modules may change in order to keep abreast of political and academic developments.