Modules  
  Core modules   
 
   Dynamics of International Social Policy 
  
  
   This module offers students the opportunity to spend some time with an organisation working in a field related to crime, victimisation or criminal justice (a ‘criminal justice organisation’).   
   The organisation may be in the public, private or third sectors and students will be able to get a sense of the way in which the issues they have encountered in their academic studies are experienced and addressed in practice. In some cases they may also be able to contribute in a practical way to the work of the organisation.  
   The academic element of the module focuses on encouraging students to reflect on their experiences observing and contributing to the work of the organisation with which they have spent time in the light of a relevant body of criminological literature and what they have learnt in other contexts.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    enable students to experience at first hand, and reflect critically on, the work of organisations in fields related to crime, victimisation and criminal justice and to make appropriate use of the knowledge, understanding and skills they have gained through studying criminology  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Economics and Policy Analysis 
  
  
  
    The module will provide an introduction to the application of economic theories and concepts to policy analysis and provide an overview of public sector economics and of current issues in public sector economic analysis.  
   
   
    
   
  
    Topics covered include: 
   
   
   
    
     taxation  
     public expenditure  
     competition and market failure/externalities  
     public good  
      public choice theory  
     discount rates and cost benefit analysis  
    
   
  
    Although focused on the UK, other countries will be examined as a way of further understanding the ongoing policy developments. 
   
   
    
   
  
    The module is designed for ‘non-mathematicians’ and does not involve any econometric analyses. No prior knowledge of economics is required. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     introduce students to the economic theories and concepts that are applied in policy analysis  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Globalisation, Europeanisation and Public Policy 
  
  
   This module provides an applied, critical and informed understanding of the concepts and processes of globalisation and Europeanisation, and the impact of globalisation and Europeanisation upon governance and public policy.  
   In particular, it examines the impacts of globalisation and Europeanisation upon the governance of and the making of public policy in Britain and other countries.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    reflect critically upon the meanings and practices of globalisation and Europeanisation  
    examine the causes and impacts of globalisation and Europeanisation upon governance and public policy  
    examine the processes and structures of governance, and their consequent implications for making public policy  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Policy Analysis: Concept and Theories 
  
  
   This module provides an applied, critical and informed understanding of policy-making and policy analysis in government.  
   It examines key concepts, models and theories of policy-making and policy analysis, and illustrates them by examining policy-making in Britain and other countries.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    reflect critically upon the meanings of public policy  
    understand the interplay of key actors in the processes of making public policy  
    evaluate public policy  
    assess key concepts of policy analysis  
    examine competing theories of public policy in modelling the policy process  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Public Management and Governance 
  
  
   This module will cover models of management and governance in the public sector.   
   It will critically examine comparative and historic trends in managerial practices and theory and contextually relevant ideas about management and governance in the public sector, including specific professional contexts.  
   This will include critically exploring specific debates about the alleged move from public administration to new public management and new public governance, from hierarchical to networked and marketised forms of organisation, and those involving communities in the design and delivery of public services.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    equip students with the theoretical knowledge and practical skills to analyse varieties of governance and management practices in the public sphere  
    examine a number of key management issues in public sector organisations  
    examine specific professional contexts, and allow students to draw on their own professional experience to illustrate multi-professional approaches to governance and management  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Methods and Research Management 
  
  
   This module provides a general introduction to a range of key issues in the design and conduct of social research, plus guidance on writing both a dissertation proposal and a dissertation.   
   The module combines more formal taught sessions with practical exercises, some of which are group based.  
   By the end of the module students will be equipped with the methodological and practical skills to carry out independent research using a variety of research designs and methods.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    explore some of the major issues (epistemological, practical and ethical) involved with undertaking social research  
    develop an appreciation of the factors to be considered in designing a piece of research  
    examine the pros and cons of key research methods used in social research  
    enhance skills in devising and managing pieces of research  
    outline the major issues associated with undertaking postgraduate dissertation research in the social sciences  
   
  
 
     
  
  Optional modules  
  Students have to choose a further 20 credits of elective modules, from an approved list.  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.