Modules  
  Core modules  
 
   Dissertation for MA in Research Methods Public Policy and Management 
  
  
   Students will be expected to work under supervision on a project of their choice related to their subject area.  
   Students' research work will be supported by their allocated supervisor, graduate school courses and the taught modules offered earlier in the programme.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    allow students to demonstrate that they have the skills and knowledge to enable the identification of a researchable question, develop a research proposal, carry out a literature review and carry empirical research relevant to the research question  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Foundations in Qualitative Methods 
  
  
   This module provides a conceptual overview of the various approaches and debates associated with theory and practice of qualitative research. It examines a range of contrasting perspectives on the design of research including problem identification, selection and sampling, and analysis.  
   Research ethics, and the role of the researcher in generating qualitative data, are key themes which run through the module. Specific consideration is given to the ways in which qualitative and quantitative approaches may be seen as complementary, and the use of mixed methods.   
   The module will also cover the ways in which qualitative research can be evaluated.   
   This module aims to:  
   
    give students the necessary theoretical underpinnings to plan, conduct and evaluate qualitative research  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Philosophy of Research - Social Science 
  
  
  
    The course covers: 
   
   
   
    
     science and the philosophical critique of science  
     epistemological debates in the social sciences - including, but not limited to, positivism and its critics, interpretative approaches including phenomenology, critical realism, social construction and the sociology of science  
    
   
     This 
    module aims to: 
    
    
    
     
      enable students to analyse the epistemological and ontological issues that arise from different social and educational theories and their impact on social research methodologies  
     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Policy Analysis: Concepts and Theories 
  
  
   This module provides an applied, critical and informed understanding of policy-making and policy analysis in government.  
   It examines key concepts, models and theories of policy-making and policy analysis, and illustrates them by examining policy-making in Britain and other countries.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    reflect critically upon the meanings of public policy  
    understand the interplay of key actors in the processes of making public policy  
    evaluate public policy  
    assess key concepts of policy analysis  
    examine competing theories of public policy in modelling the policy process  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Public Management and Governance 
  
  
   This module will cover models of management and governance in the public sector.   
   It will critically examine comparative and historic trends in managerial practices and theory and contextually relevant ideas about management and governance in the public sector, including specific professional contexts.  
   This will include critically exploring specific debates about the alleged move from public administration to new public management and new public governance, from hierarchical to networked and marketised forms of organisation, and those involving communities in the design and delivery of public services.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    equip students with the theoretical knowledge and practical skills to analyse varieties of governance and management practices in the public sphere  
    examine a number of key management issues in public sector organisations  
    examine specific professional contexts, and allow students to draw on their own professional experience to illustrate multi-professional approaches to governance and management  
   
  
 
     
  
  Core modules from the School of Health Sciences  
  
   Fundamentals of Quantitative Analysis M14153  
  
  Core modules from the School of Politics and International Relations  
  
   
    Research Design, Practice and Ethics M14151  
   
  
  Optional modules  
  Students need to choose 4 x 10 credit advanced training modules from the following list:  
 
   Archival Methods 
  
  
  
    Informed by insights from other disciplinary contexts, this module will explore how and why the archive as a research site might similarly be of interest to qualitative sociologists and investigate how archival documents can be used in research.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module will therefore both offer an introduction to archive theory and a hands-on introduction to working with a variety of archival documents. The module will consider the following issues: 
   
   
   
    
     how might we define the status and purpose of the archive and its contents?  
     how does the archive’s status and purpose influence our mode of engagement with it?  
     what are the politics of the archive? What ‘traces’ are present, what missing, with what gendered, ‘raced’, classed etc. results?  
     how have historians and others worked with and within the archive, given these limitations?  
     what are the advantages and limitations in ‘re-using’ qualitative archived data?  
     approaches to interpreting archival documents  
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     
      problematise the meaning and status of the archive and its contents  
      understand the ways in which archival documents might be used in sociological research  
      acquire knowledge of the appropriate theoretical and methodological tools to critically analyse a range of archival documents  
      understand different approaches to interpreting a range of documents in the archival context  
     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Doing Ethnography 
  
  
  
    This module considers in detail 'ethnography' as a qualitative research method.  
   
   
    
   
  
    It explores the underlying principles and practices of the approach, which, broadly speaking, involves studying people 'at first hand', in detail, usually at length and in the context in which they live, work, play etc. It will explore: 
   
   
   
    
     key concepts and approaches  
     important ethnographic studies  
     critiques, strengths and weaknesses  
     designing and planning your own ethnographic study  
     students will experience a range of learning methods including lectures, workshops, film viewings, student presentations and group work  
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     give students knowledge of the practical and theoretical underpinnings of the ethnographic method  
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Individual and Group Interviews 
  
  
  
    This block will involve practically-oriented sessions, to explore a variety of individual and group interview approaches. This will include focus groups as well as structured, semi-structured, and more open-ended styles of interviewing (including narrative approaches). It will also consider the use of stimulus material, vignettes, and critical incidents as possible ways of structuring interview interactions. 
   
   
    
   
  
    Sessions will include practical demonstrations of interviewing, and will involve the analysis of interview transcripts, along with published research papers, which use different analytical approaches.  
   
   
    
   
  
    Among a range of issues that will be considered, it will discuss some of the ethical issues that can arise when this type of fieldwork is being conducted, and there will be plenty of opportunity for group members to draw upon their own research experiences within this and other discussions.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     
      give students practical, hands-on experience in using different qualitative approaches to the individual and group interviews, and think through some of the methodological and epistemological issues that it gives rise to  
     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Researching Media, Culture and Society 
  
  
  
    This module will offer a masterclass in key debates and issues in the Anglo-American media in order to explore a range of theories about popular media and different approaches to studying a range of media genres. It problematises the role of the media in contemporary culture and society in two specific contexts:  
   
   
   
    
     gender and identity   
     science and society   
    
   
  
    The gender and identity block will explore feminist theories about popular media, with the emphasis on exploring research methods and methodologies appropriate for analysing gendered mediated representations as they intersect with other axes of difference such as race, class and sexuality. 
   
   
    
   
  
    science and society aims to engage students with the way that the media frame issues through culturally situated language and images, exploring the advantages and disadvantages of these ways of framing, steering and stimulating public debate about science and technology.  
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     
      problematise the role of the media in contemporary culture and society, using the case studies of ‘gender and identity’, ‘science and society’ and ‘culture and citizenship’  
      acquire knowledge of the appropriate theoretical and methodological tools to critically analyse a range of media texts  
      understand the ways in which media representations are classed, racialised and sexualised as well as gendered  
      understand the ideological, professional, cultural and technological factors governing the practices of the mass media  
     
    
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Researching Public Policy and Management 
  
  
  
    This module covers some of the main approaches to researching public policy and public management.  
   
   
    
   
  
    The module will consider the role of theory in policy-related studies and then explore the pros and cons of the following designs/methods:  
   
   
   
    
     comparative research (in particular cross-country research)  
     researching networks and governance arrangements  
     use of performance indicators  
     elite interviewing and the evaluation of policies and cost-benefit analysis  
    
   
  
    The module will also use case studies to illustrate the designs, methodologies and methods discussed. 
   
   
    
   
  
    This 
   module aims to: 
   
   
   
    
     give students an in-depth understanding of key approaches to researching public policy and management  
    
   
  
 
     
  
  Optional modules from the School of Health Sciences  
  
   
    Evaluating Interventions, Services and Health and Social Care B74EIS  
    Mixed Methods in Health Research B74MMR  
    Principles and Processes of Comprehensive Systematic Review B74CSR  
   
   Optional modules from the School of Law  
   
    Children and Research M34175  
   
   
    Optional modules from the School of Pharmacy  
    
     
      Social Epidemiology: Theories and Methods for Understanding the Social Determinants of Health B74SET  
     
     Optional modules from the School of Politics and International Relations  
     
      Intermediate Quantitative Analysis M14160  
      Measurement Models M14201  
      Structural Equation Modelling M14205  
     
    
   
  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.