Modules  
  There are three core, 20-credit modules, each of which is run over a period of four months once a year:  
  
   The Language Learner and Language Learning (from May to September)  
   Developments in TESOL Methodology (from September to January)  
   Applied Linguistics for TESOL (from January to May)  
  
  The module you begin with depends on the start date you have chosen. You can view the sample course timetable but please note this is subject to change.  
  Each of the core modules follows the same delivery pattern:  
  
   A 'soft start' introductory week  
   Ten weeks of structured engagement with the module materials  
   Six further weeks in which to complete the module assignment  
  
  After you have finished the core modules you will need to complete four 15-credit elective modules from the selection below. Typically, elective modules require a minimum enrolment of four students and may be withdrawn if this requirement is not met.  
  You will be asked to sign up online for each elective a minimum of three weeks before the module start date.  
  The 15-credit elective modules are:  
  
   Assessment in EAP  
   English for Specific Purposes  
   Issues in Teaching EAP  
   Learning to Train  
   The Management of Language Teaching Organisations  
   Materials Evaluation and Design  
   Technology-Enhanced Language Learning  
  
  It is possible to replace two 15-credit electives with one 30-credit online module from our MA Education (Flexible) programme. Alternatively, you can replace two 15-credit electives with one 30-credit MA Education module taken intensively face-to-face at Summer School in the UK (subject to availability). If you wish to study one of these modules, you will have to, in the first instance, consult the course leader of the MA TESOL (web-based).  
  Assessment  
  Each 20-credit module is assessed by a written assignment of 4,000 words, and 15-credit modules by a written assignment of 3,000 words (or equivalent). To complete the masters programme successfully, a pass of 50 must be achieved on each assignment.    
  For award of the MA, you must also complete a 60-credit dissertation (12,000-15,000 words) which is an original piece of research on an approved topic.