Modules  
  On the full MSc and Postgraduate Diploma courses all of the following are core modules:   
  
   Module one: Imaging Methods and Image Analysis (30 credits)  
  
  
   This module provides a comprehensive review of advanced neuroimaging methods as well as the theory and practical application of image analysis. In Imaging Methods, study will focus on techniques including functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), structural MRI (voxel-based morphometry) and diffusion-tensor imaging.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Module two: Clinical Neuroimaging (30 credits)  
  
  
   This module will provide students with the opportunity to develop and understanding of the anatomical basis of neuroscience and applied neuroanatomy as well as the clinical manifestations of central nervous system disease and the appearances of common neurological diseases on imaging.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Module three: Translational Neuroimaging (20 credits)  
  
  
   On this module, students will gain an understanding of the molecular basis of neurodegeneration and mental disease and the interpretation of data acquired by assessment of the normal and diseased central nervous system (CNS), as well as the development of novel CNS drugs and their clinical evaluation.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Module four: Research Methods (Ethics and Statistics) (20 credits)  
  
  
   This module will introduce key issues in research and practice in psychology through a series of individual seminars. There will also be a series of workshops on statistical methods.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Module five: Individual Research Portfolio (20 credits)  
  
  
   Short research placements, selected workshops and seminars will be identified with the supervisor to broaden the student's experience in neuroimaging research and to enable the selection of of a research topic. A testable research hypothesis will be developed as a basis for the research project module.  
  
 
     
  
  
   Module six: Research Project (60 credits)  
  
  
   This project will lead to a dissertation and may be used for publication. Students can choose from a range of clinical and preclinical projects and there will be 1:1 supervision of the project. This may be a standalone project, or a clearly defined part of a larger research project led by the supervisor.  
  
 
     
  
     
  For details on our modules, please see the Module Catalogue.  
  Postgraduate Certificate and Diploma  
  
   Postgraduate Certificate in Neuroimaging (60 credits)  
  
  
   For the Postgraduate Certificate, a mix of modules can be chosen as follows:   
   Option one Module one: Imaging Methods and Analysis, PLUS Module two: Clinical Neuroimaging  Option two   Module one: Imaging Methods and Analysis, PLUS Module three: Translational Neuroscience, PLUS Module four: Research Methods (Statistics element)  Option three   Module two: Clinical Neuroimaging, PLUS Module three: Translational Neuroscience, PLUS Module four: Research Methods (Statistics element)  
  
 
     
  
  
   Postgraduate Diploma in Neuroimaging (120 credits)  
  
  
   Students interested in undertaking the Postgraduate Diploma will take all taught modules (Modules one to five).