Modules  
  Please note that module availability may change from year to year and different modules may be available from those detailed below.    
  Core modules  
  Professional Practice 1 (20 credits)  
  Designed to provide a work based learning opportunity, enabling the learner to evaluate dietetic practice critically and to adopt a reflective and critical approach to your work which will benefit your practice and that of your department. Taught content is minimal.  
  Professional Practice 2 (20 credits)  
  Designed to provide a work based learning opportunity, enabling the learner to demonstrate an improvement in professional practice expertise. You will also develop high level skills in experiential and reflective learning as a basis for lifelong learning and demonstrate an ability to recognise self transformation and self direction through the development of a learning contract. Taught content is minimal.  
  Research Strategies in Healthcare (20 credits)  
  This module is designed to enable health and community care practitioners to develop their skills of critical review and knowledge of research methods appropriate to their field of practice. The course equips you with knowledge concerning the importance of theoretical paradigms, research design, sampling strategies, data collection and analysis methodologies to healthcare research. It also focuses on the development of advanced search skills and the ability to integrate research findings into clinical practice.  
  Research Project (60 credits)   
  In this dissertation module you will have the opportunity to undertake an individual and substantial piece of work in an area of personal interest relevant to dietetic practice, involving the application of investigative, critical and analytical skills, and the presentation of a report (12,000-15,000 words) of the process and outcome of the work, together with a viva voce examination.  
  This module is primarily carried out via independent study/activity. Individual tutorials with the designated supervisor and advisors appropriate to the area of study are also arranged over the duration of the project. Additional support can be provided in the form of "statistics clinics".  
  Optional modules (20 credits each)  
  
   Advanced Clinical Supervisory Skills  
   Nutrition Support  
   Obesity Management  
   Renal Management  
   Public Health Nutrition Management  
   Public Health Nutrition Policy  
   Enhancing Communication Skills for One-to-One Client Consultations  
   Understanding and Changing Behaviour  
   Paediatric Nutrition  
   Advanced Communication Skills for One-to-One Client Consultations  
   Clinical Supervision  
   Diabetes I  
   Diabetes II  
   Gastroenterology  
  
  Please see the University's module catalogue for details on each module