Modules  
  Core modules   
 
   Criminology in Practice 
  
  
   This module offers students the opportunity to spend some time with an organisation working in a field related to crime, victimisation or criminal justice (a ‘criminal justice organisation’).  
   The organisation may be in the public, private or third sectors and students will be able to get a sense of the way in which the issues they have encountered in their academic studies are experienced and addressed in practice. In some cases they may also be able to contribute in a practical way to the work of the organisation.   
   The academic element of the module focuses on encouraging students to reflect on their experiences observing and contributing to the work of the organisation with which they have spent time in the light of a relevant body of criminological literature and what they have learnt in other contexts.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    enable students to experience at first hand, and reflect critically on, the work of organisations in fields related to crime, victimisation and criminal justice and to make appropriate use of the knowledge, understanding and skills they have gained through studying criminology  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Criminology: Theories and Concepts 
  
  
   The module considers a range of theoretical and conceptual issues in criminology relating to the nature and scope of criminology as a discipline as well as recent developments in criminological theory.  
   The work discussed during the course of the module will be at the forefront of the discipline.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a systematic critical understanding of a range of theories and concepts in criminology  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Contemporary Issues and Debates in Criminology 
  
  
   The module engages with a range of issues and debates in contemporary criminology.  
   Contributions to the module will be made by a number of guest speakers with experience in the criminal justice system and related areas of practice as well as from members of staff in the School of Sociology and Social Policy and other schools in the University.   
   The issues and debates covered in the course of the module will vary from year so the following list is provided for illustrative purposes only:   
   
    the political economy of crime and justice in an age of austerity  
    defining and responding to ‘hate crime’  
    pluralised policing  
    prosecuting complex cases  
    mental health in prisons  
    state crime, human rights and transitional justice  
    ‘whole life’ sentences  
   
   This module aims to:  
   
    develop a systematic critical understanding of a range of issues and debates at the forefront of contemporary criminology  
   
  
 
     
  
 
   Research Methods and Research Management 
  
  
   This module provides a general introduction to a range of key issues in the design and conduct of social research, plus guidance on writing both a dissertation proposal and a dissertation.   
   The module combines more formal taught sessions with practical exercises, some of which are group based.  
   By the end of the module students will be equipped with the methodological and practical skills to carry out independent research using a variety of research designs and methods.  
   This module aims to:  
   
    explore some of the major issues (epistemological, practical and ethical) involved with undertaking social research  
    develop an appreciation of the factors to be considered in designing a piece of research  
    examine the pros and cons of key research methods used in social research  
    enhance skills in devising and managing pieces of research  
    outline the major issues associated with undertaking postgraduate dissertation research in the social sciences  
   
  
 
     
  
  Optional modules  
  Students have to choose a further 40 credits of elective modules, split equally between the autumn and spring terms.   
  They can choose modules from other courses within and outside the School of Sociology and Social Policy with approval from the Programme Director.  
  Please note that all module details are subject to change.